--- Page 1 ---
PHYSICS
PART – I
TEXTBOOK  FOR CLASS XII
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 2 ---
First EditionFirst EditionFirst EditionFirst EditionFirst Edition
December 2006 Pausa 1928
ReprintedReprintedReprintedReprintedReprinted
December 2007, December 2008,
December 2009, January 2011,
January 2012, November 2012,
November 2013, December 2014,
December 2015, February 2017,
January 2018, January 2019,
October 2019, August 2021 and
December 2021
Revised EditionRevised EditionRevised EditionRevised EditionRevised Edition
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944
ReprintedReprintedReprintedReprintedReprinted
March 2024   Chaitra 1946
December 2024   Pausa 1946
PD 225T PD 225T PD 225T PD 225T PD 225T HK HKHK HKHK
© National Council of Educational© National Council of Educational© National Council of Educational© National Council of Educational© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006, 2022Research and Training, 2006, 2022Research and Training, 2006, 2022Research and Training, 2006, 2022Research and Training, 2006, 2022
` 155.00 155.00155.00 155.00155.00ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
qNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise
without the prior permission of the publisher.
qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-sold,
hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding
or cover other than that in which it is published.
qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised price
indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should
be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICA TION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata  700 114 Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication TeamPublication TeamPublication TeamPublication TeamPublication Team
Head, P ublication :M.V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor :Bijnan Sutar
Chief Production :Jahan L al
Officer (I n charge)
Chief Business :Amitabh Kumar
Manager
Assistant Editor :R.N. Bhardwaj
Assistant Production :Deepak Kumar
Officer
Cover, LayoutCover, LayoutCover, LayoutCover, LayoutCover, Layout  and Illustrationsand Illustrationsand Illustrationsand Illustrationsand Illustrations
Shweta Rao12089 – 12089 – 12089 – 12089 – 12089 – P PPPPHYSICS HYSICSHYSICS HYSICSHYSICS   P   P  P   P  PART ARTART ARTART I  I I  I I
Textbook for Class XIIISBN 81-7450-631-4ISBN 81-7450-631-4ISBN 81-7450-631-4ISBN 81-7450-631-4ISBN 81-7450-631-4
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by
the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed at Manipal T echnologies Limited,
Udayavani Building, Press C orner ,
Manipal, K arnataka–576104
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 3 ---
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 recommends that children’s life at school must
be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish
learning which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home and
community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement
this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between dif ferent subject ar eas. W e hope these measur es will take us significantly
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (NPE), 1986.
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers will take to
encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.
We must r ecognise that, given space, time and fr eedom, childr en generate new knowledge by engaging
with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis
of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in
learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change i n school routines and mode of functioning. Flexibility in
the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the
required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching
and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at
school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried
to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on
experience.
The National Council of Educational Resear ch and T raining (NCER T) appr eciates the har d
work done by the textbook development committee r esponsible for this book. W e wish to thank the
Chairperson of the advisory gr oup in science and mathematics, Pr ofessor J.V . Narlikar and the
Chief Advisor for this book, Pr ofessor A.W . Joshi for guiding the work of this committee. Several
teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for
making this possible. W e are indebted to the institutions and or ganisations which have gener ously
permitted us to draw upon their r esour ces, material and personnel. W e are especially grateful to
the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Pr ofessor G.P . Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As
an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its
products, NCER T welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2006 Research and Training
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 4 ---
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 5 ---
RATIONALISATION  OF CONTENT  IN THE TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on
students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the
content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative
mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise
the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT
across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
•Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same
class
•Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
•Difficulty level
•Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-
learning
•Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 6 ---
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 7 ---
TEXTBOOK  DEVELOPMENT  COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON , ADVISORY  GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS  IN SCIENCE  AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar , Emeritus Pr ofessor , Inter -University Centr e for Astr onomy and Astr ophysics
(IUCAA), Ganesh khind, Pune University  Campus , Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
A.W. Joshi, Honorary V isiting Scientist, National Centre for Radio Astr ophysics (NCRA), Pune
University Campus, Pune (Formerly Professor  at Department of Physics, University of Pune)
MEMBERS
A.K. Ghatak, Emeritus Pr ofessor , Department of Physics, Indian Institute of T echnology,
New Delhi
Alika Khar e, Professor , Department of Physics, Indian Institute of T echnology, Guwahati
Anjali Kshirsagar , Reader , Department of Physics, University of Pune, Pune
Anuradha Mathur , PGT , Moder n School, V asant V ihar, New Delhi
Atul Mody, Lecturer (S.G.), VES College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Mumbai
B.K. Shar ma, Professor , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi
Chitra Goel, PGT , Rajkiya Pratibha V ikas Vidyalaya, T yagraj Nagar , New Delhi
Gagan Gupta, Reader , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi
H.C. Pradhan, Professor , Homi Bhabha Centre of Science Education ( TIFR), Mumbai
N. Panchapakesan, Professor  (Retd. ), Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of
Delhi, Delhi
R. Joshi, Lectur er (S.G.), DESM, NCER T, New Delhi
S.K. Dash, Reader , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi
S. Rai Choudhary, Professor , Department of Physics and Astr ophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi
S.K. Upadhyay, PGT , Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Muzaffar Nagar
S.N. Prabhakara, PGT, DM School,  Regional Institute of Education (NCERT), Mysore
V.H. Raybagkar , Reader , Nowrosjee W adia College, Pune
Vishwajeet Kulkarni, Teacher (Grade I ), Higher Secondary Section, Smt. Parvatibai Chowgule
College, Margao, Goa
MEMBER -COORDINATOR
V.P. Srivastava, Reader ,  DESM, NCER T, New Delhi
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 8 ---
Constitution of India
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty , unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper , humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or , as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A  containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with ef fect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with ef fect from
1 April 2010).Part IV A (Article 51 A)
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 9 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Resear ch and T raining acknowledges the valuable
contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the development of Physics Textbook
for Class XII. The Council also acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics
for reviewing and refining the manuscripts of this book:
Anu V enugopalan, Lectur er, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, GGSIP University, Delhi;
A.K. Das, PGT, St. Xavier’s Senior Secondary School, Delhi; Bharati Kukkal, PGT, Kendriya
Vidyalaya, Pushp V ihar, New Delhi; D.A. Desai, Lectur er (Retd.) , Rupar el College, Mumbai;
Devendra Kumar , PGT, Rajkiya Pratibha V ikas V idyalaya, Y amuna V ihar, Delhi; I.K. Gogia, PGT,
Kendriya V idyalaya, Gole Market, New Delhi; K.C. Shar ma, Reader , Regional Institute of Education
(NCER T), Ajmer; M.K. Nandy, Associate Pr ofessor , Department of Physics, Indian Institute of
T
echnology, Guwahati; M.N. Bapat, Reader , Regional Institute of Education (NCER T), Mysuru;
R. Bhattacharjee, Assistant Professor , Department of Electr onics and Communication
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati; R.S. Das, Vice-Principal (Retd.) , Balwant
Ray Mehta Senior Secondary School, Lajpat Nagar , New Delhi; Sangeeta D. Gadr e, Reader , Kirori
Mal College, Delhi; Sur esh Kumar , PGT, Delhi Public School, Dwarka, New Delhi; Sushma Jair eth,
Reader , Department of W omen’s Studies, NCER T, New Delhi; Shyama Rath, Reader , Department
of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi; Y ashu Kumar , PGT, Kulachi Hans Raj
Model School, Ashok V ihar, Delhi.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the valuable contribution of  the following academics
for the editing and finalisation of this book: B.B. T ripathi, Professor (Retd.) , Department of Physics,
Indian Institute of T echnology, New Delhi; Dipan K. Ghosh, Pr ofessor , Department of Physics,
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai; Dipanjan Mitra, Scientist , National Centre for Radio
Astrophysics (TIFR), Pune; G.K. Mehta, Raja Ramanna Fellow, Inter -University Accelerator
Centr e, New Delhi; G.S. V isweswaran, Professor , Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology, New Delhi; H.C. Kandpal, Head , Optical Radiation Standards, National
Physical Laboratory, New Delhi; H.S. Mani, Raja Ramanna Fellow , Institute of Mathematical
Sciences, Chennai; K. Thyagarajan, Professor , Department of Physics, Indian Institute of
Technology, New Delhi; P .C. V inod Kumar , Professor , Department of Physics, Sar dar Patel
University, V allabh V idyanagar , Gujarat; S. Annapoor ni, Professor , Department of Physics and
Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi; S.C. Dutta Roy, Emeritus Pr ofessor , Department of
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi; S.D. Joglekar , Professor ,
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of T echnology, Kanpur; and V . Sundara Raja, Professor ,
Sri Venkateswara University, T irupati.
The Council also acknowledges the valuable contributions of the following academics for
refining the text in 2017: A.K. Srivastava, Assistant Pr ofessor , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi; Ar nab
Sen, Assistant Pr ofessor , NERIE, Shillong; L.S. Chauhan, Assistant Pr ofessor , RIE, Bhopal;
O.N. Awasthi, Pr ofessor  (Retd. ), RIE, Bhopal; Rachna Gar g, Professor , DESM, NCER T, New
Delhi; Raman Namboodiri, Assistant Pr ofessor , RIE, Mysuru; R.R. Koir eng, Assistant Pr ofessor ,
DCS, NCER T, New Delhi; Shashi Prabha, Professor , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi; and S.V . Shar ma,
Professor , RIE, Ajmer .
Special thanks ar e due to Hukum Singh, Professor and  Head,  DESM, NCER T for his support.
The Council also acknowledges the support provided by the APC office and the administrative
staff of the DESM; Deepak Kapoor , Inchar ge, Computer Station; Inder Kumar , DTP Operator;
Mohd. Qamar Tabrez, Copy Editor; Ashima Srivastava, Proof Reader  in shaping this book.
The contributions of the Publication Department in bringing out this book are also duly
acknowledged.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 10 ---
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
·before law and equal protection of laws;
·irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
·of opportunity in public employment;
·by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Freedom
·of expression, assembly , association, movement, residence and profession;
·of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
·of protection of life and personal liberty;
·of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six  and fourteen years;
·of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
·for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
·for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Freedom of Religion
·freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
·freedom to manage religious affairs;
·freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
·freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
·for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture ;
·for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
·by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 11 ---
PREFACE
It gives me pleasure to place this book in the hands of the students, teachers and the public at
large (whose role cannot be overlooked). It is a natural sequel to the Class XI textbook which
was brought out in 2006. This book is also a trimmed version of the textbooks which existed so
far. The chapter on ther mal and chemical ef fects of curr ent has been cut out. This topic has also
been dropped from the CBSE syllabus. Similarly, the chapter on communications has been
substantially curtailed. It has been rewritten in an easily comprehensible form.
Although most other chapters have been based on the earlier versions, several parts and
sections in them have been rewritten. The Development Team has been guided by the feedback
received from innumerable teachers across the country.
In producing these books, Class XI as well as Class XII, there has been a basic change of
emphasis. Both the books present physics to students without assuming that they would pursue
this subject beyond the higher secondary level. This new view has been prompted by the various
observations and suggestions made in the National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005.
Similarly, in today’s educational scenario where students can opt for various combinations of
subjects, we cannot assume that a physics student is also studying mathematics. Therefore,
physics has to be presented, so to say, in a standalone form.
As in Class XI textbook, some interesting box items have been inserted in many chapters.
They are not meant for teaching or examinations. Their purpose is to catch the attention of the
reader , to show some applications in daily life or in other ar eas of science and technology, to
suggest a simple experiment, to show connection of concepts in different areas of physics, and
in general, to break the monotony and enliven the book.
Featur es like Summary, Points to Ponder , Exer cises and Additional Exer cises at the end of
each chapter , and Examples have been r etained. Several concept-based Exer cises have been
transferred from end-of-chapter Exercises to Examples with Solutions in the text. It is hoped
that this will make the concepts discussed in the chapter more comprehensible. Several new
examples and exercises have been added. Students wishing to pursue physics further would
find Points to Ponder and Additional Exercises very useful and thoughtful. To provide resources
beyond the textbook  and to encourage eLear ning, each chapter has been pr ovided with
some relevant website addresses under the title ePhysics . These sites provide additional
material on specific topics and also provide learners with opportunites for interactive
demonstrations/experiments.
The intricate concepts of physics must be understood, comprehended and appreciated.
Students must learn to ask questions like ‘why’, ‘how’, ‘how do we know it’. They will find
almost always that the question ‘why’ has no answer within the domain of physics and science
in general. But that itself is a learning experience, is it not? On the other hand, the question
‘how’ has been reasonably well answered by physicists in the case of most natural phenomena.
In fact, with the understanding of how things happen, it has been possible to make use of many
phenomena to create technological applications for the use of humans.
For example, consider statements in a book, like ‘A negatively charged electron is attracted
by the positively charged plate’, or ‘In this experiment, light (or electron) behaves like a wave’.
You will r ealise that it is not possible to answer ‘why’. This question belongs to the domain of
philosophy or metaphysics. But we can answer ‘how’, we can find the force acting, we can find
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 12 ---
the wavelength of the photon (or electron), we can determine how things behave under different
conditions, and we can develop instruments which will use these phenomena to our advantage.
It has been a pleasure to work for these books at the higher secondary level, along with a
team of members. The Textbook Development Team, Review Team and Editing Teams involved
college and university teachers, teachers from Indian Institutes of Technology, scientists from
national institutes and laboratories, as well as, higher secondary teachers. The feedback and
critical look provided by higher secondary teachers in the various teams are highly laudable.
Most box items were generated by members of one or the other team, but three of them were
generated by friends and well-wishers not part of any team. W e are thankful to Dr P .N. Sen of
Pune, Professor Roopmanjari Ghosh of Delhi and Dr Rajesh B Khaparde of Mumbai for allowing
us to use their box items, r espectively, in Chapters 3, 4 (Part I) and 9 (Part II). W e are thankful
to the members of the review and editing workshops to discuss and refine the first draft of the
textbook.  W e also expr ess our gratitude to Pr of. Krishna Kumar , Director, NCER T, for entrusting
us with the task of presenting this textbook as a part of the national effort for improving science
education. I also thank Pr of. G. Ravindra, Joint Dir ector, NCER T,  for his help fr om time-to-
time. Pr of. Hukum Singh, Head , Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCER T,
was always willing to help us in our endeavour in every possible way.
We welcome suggestions and comments fr om our valued users, especially students and
teachers. W e wish our young r eaders a happy jour ney into the exciting r ealm of physics.
A. W. JOSHI
Chief Advisor
Textbook Development Committee
xii
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 13 ---
CONTENTS
FOREWORD iii
RATIONALISATION  OF CONTENT  IN THE TEXTBOOKS v
CHAPTER ONE
ELECTRIC  CHARGES  AND FIELDS
1.1 Introduction 1
1.2 Electric Charge 1
1.3 Conductors and Insulators 3
1.4 Basic Properties of Electric Charge 4
1.5 Coulomb’s Law 6
1.6 Forces between Multiple Charges 11
1.7 Electric Field 14
1.8 Electric Field Lines 19
1.9 Electric Flux 21
1.10 Electric Dipole 23
1.11 Dipole in a Uniform External Field 27
1.12 Continuous Charge Distribution 28
1.13 Gauss’s Law 29
1.14 Applications of Gauss’s Law 33
CHAPTER TWO
ELECTROSTATIC  POTENTIAL  AND CAPACITANCE
2.1 Introduction 45
2.2 Electrostatic Potential 47
2.3 Potential due to a Point Charge 48
2.4 Potential due to an Electric Dipole 49
2.5 Potential due to a System of Charges 51
2.6 Equipotential Surfaces 54
2.7 Potential Energy of a System of Charges 55
2.8 Potential Energy in an External Field 58
2.9 Electrostatics of Conductors 61
2.10 Dielectrics and Polarisation 65
2.11 Capacitors and Capacitance 67
2.12 The Parallel Plate Capacitor 68
2.13 Effect of Dielectric on Capacitance 69
2.14 Combination of Capacitors 71
2.15 Energy Stored in a Capacitor 73
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 14 ---
CHAPTER THREE
CURRENT  ELECTRICITY
3.1 Introduction 81
3.2 Electric Current 81
3.3 Electric Currents in Conductors 82
3.4 Ohm’s law 83
3.5 Drift of Electrons and the Origin of Resistivity 85
3.6 Limitations of Ohm’s Law 89
3.7 Resistivity of V arious Materials 89
3.8 Temperature Dependence of Resistivity 90
3.9 Electrical Energy, Power 92
3.10 Cells, emf, Internal Resistance 93
3.11 Cells in Series and in Parallel 95
3.12 Kirchhoff’s Rules 97
3.13 Wheatstone Bridge 100
CHAPTER FOUR
MOVING CHARGES  AND MAGNETISM
4.1 Introduction 107
4.2 Magnetic Force 108
4.3 Motion in a Magnetic Field 112
4.4 Magnetic Field due to a Current Element, Biot-Savart Law 113
4.5 Magnetic Field on the Axis of a Circular Current Loop 115
4.6 Ampere’s Circuital Law 117
4.7 The Solenoid 121
4.8 Force between Two Parallel Currents, the Ampere 122
4.9 Torque on Current Loop, Magnetic Dipole 124
4.10 The Moving Coil Galvanometer 129
CHAPTER FIVE
MAGNETISM  AND MATTER
5.1 Introduction 136
5.2 The Bar Magnet 137
5.3 Magnetism and Gauss’s Law 142
5.4 Magnetisation and Magnetic Intensity 145
5.5 Magnetic Properties of Materials 147
xiv
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 15 ---
CHAPTER SIX
ELECTROMAGNETIC  INDUCTION
6.1 Introduction 154
6.2 The Experiments of Faraday and Henry 155
6.3 Magnetic Flux 156
6.4 Faraday’s Law of Induction 157
6.5 Lenz’s Law and Conservation of Energy 160
6.6 Motional Electromotive Force 162
6.7 Inductance 165
6.8 AC Generator 170
CHAPTER SEVEN
ALTERNATING  CURRENT
7.1 Introduction 177
7.2 AC V oltage Applied to a Resistor 178
7.3 Representation of AC Curr ent and V oltage by
Rotating V ectors — Phasors 181
7.4 AC V oltage Applied to an Inductor 181
7.5 AC V oltage Applied to a Capacitor 184
7.6 AC V oltage Applied to a Series LCR Cir cuit 186
7.7 Power in AC Circuit: The Power Factor 190
7.8 Transfor mers 194
CHAPTER EIGHT
ELECTROMAGNETIC  WAVES
8.1 Introduction 201
8.2 Displacement Current 202
8.3 Electr omagnetic W aves 205
8.4 Electromagnetic Spectrum 208
ANSWERS 215
xv
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 16 ---
COVER DESIGN
(Adapted from http://nobelprize.org and
the Nobel Prize in Physics 2006)
Different stages in the evolution of
the universe.
BACK COVER
(Adapted fr om http://www.iter .org and
http://www.dae.gov.in)
Cut away view of International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor  (ITER)
device. The man in the bottom shows the scale.
ITER is a joint international research and development project that
aims to demonstrate the scientific and technical feasibility of fusion power .
India is one of the seven full partners in the project, the others being
the European Union (represented by EURATOM), Japan, the People’s
Republic of China, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the
USA. ITER will be constructed in Europe, at Cadarache in the South of
France and will pr ovide 500 MW of fusion power .
Fusion is the energy source of the sun and the stars. On earth, fusion
research is aimed at demonstrating that this energy source can be used to
produce electricity in a safe and environmentally benign way, with
abundant fuel resources, to meet the needs of a growing world population.
For details of India’s r ole, see Nuclear India , Vol. 39, Nov. 11-12/
May-June 2006, issue available at Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)
website mentioned above.
Reprint 2025-26