--- Page 1 ---
7.1  I NTRODUCTION
We have so far consider ed dir ect curr ent (dc) sour ces and cir cuits with dc
sources. These currents do not change direction with time. But voltages
and currents that vary with time are very common. The electric mains
supply in our homes and offices is a voltage that varies like a sine function
with time. Such a voltage is called alter nating voltage  (ac voltage) and
the curr ent driven by it in a circuit is called the alternating curr ent (ac
current) *. Today, most of the electrical devices we use require ac voltage.
This is mainly because most of the electrical energy sold by power
companies is transmitted and distributed as alternating current. The main
reason for preferring use of ac voltage over dc voltage is that ac voltages
can be easily and efficiently converted from one voltage to the other by
means of transfor mers. Further , electrical ener gy can also be transmitted
economically over long distances. AC circuits exhibit characteristics which
are exploited in many devices of daily use. For example, whenever we
tune our radio to a favourite station, we are taking advantage of a special
property of ac cir cuits – one of many that you will study in this chapter .Chapter Seven
ALTERNATING
CURRENT
*The phrases ac voltage  and ac current  are contradictory and redundant,
respectively, since they mean, literally, alternating current voltage  and alternating
current current . Still, the abbreviation ac to designate an electrical quantity
displaying simple harmonic time dependance has become so universally accepted
that we follow others in its use. Further , voltage  – another phrase commonly
used means potential difference between two points.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 2 ---
Physics
178NICOLA TESLA (185 6 – 1943)Nicola Tesla  (1856 –
1943)  Serbian-American
scientist, inventor and
genius. He conceived the
idea of the rotating
magnetic field, which is the
basis of practically all
alternating current
machinery, and which
helped usher in the age of
electric power. He also
invented among other
things the induction motor,
the polyphase system of ac
power, and the high
frequency induction coil
(the Tesla coil) used in radio
and television sets and
other electronic equipment.
The SI unit of magnetic field
is named in his honour.
7.2  AC V OLTAGE  APPLIED TO A RESISTOR
Figure 7.1 shows a resistor connected to a source ε of
ac voltage. The symbol for an ac source in a circuit
diagram is . We consider a source which produces
sinusoidally varying potential difference across its
terminals. Let this potential difference, also called ac
voltage, be given by
sinmv v t ω = (7.1)
where vm is the amplitude of the oscillating potential
difference and ω  is its angular frequency.
To find the value of current through the resistor, we
apply Kirchhoff’s loop rule ε( )t=∑ 0(refer to Section
3.12), to the circuit shown in Fig. 7.1 to get
= sinmv t i Rω
or   sinmvi tRω =
Since R  is a constant, we can write this equation as
sinmi i t ω= (7.2)
where the current amplitude im is given by
m
mviR= (7.3)
Equation (7.3) is Ohm’s law, which for resistors, works equally
well for both ac and dc voltages. The voltage across a pure resistor
and the current through it, given by Eqs. (7.1) and (7.2) are
plotted as a function of time in Fig. 7.2. Note, in particular that
both v and i reach zero, minimum and maximum values at the
same time. Clearly, the voltage  and current are in phase with
each other .
We see that, like the applied voltage, the current varies
sinusoidally and has corresponding positive and negative values
during each cycle. Thus, the sum of the instantaneous current
values over one complete cycle is zero, and the average current
is zero. The fact that the average current is zero, however, doesFIGURE  7.1  AC voltage applied to a resistor.
FIGURE  7.2 In a pure
resistor, the voltage and
current are in phase. The
minima, zero and maxima
occur at the same
respective times.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 3 ---
179Alternating CurrentGEORGE WESTINGHOUSE (1846 – 1914)Geor ge W estinghouse
(1846 – 1914) A leading
proponent of the use of
alternating current over
direct current. Thus,
he came into conflict
with Thomas Alva Edison,
an advocate of direct
curr ent. W estinghouse
was convinced that the
technology of alternating
current was the key to
the electrical future.
He founded the famous
Company named after him
and enlisted the services
of Nicola Tesla and
other inventors in the
development of alternating
current motors and
apparatus for the
transmission of high
tension current, pioneering
in large scale lighting.
not mean that the average power consumed is zero and
that there is no dissipation of electrical energy. As you
know, Joule heating is given by i2R and depends on i2
(which is always positive whether i is positive or negative)
and not on i. Thus, there is Joule heating and
dissipation of electrical energy when an
ac curr ent passes thr ough a r esistor .
The instantaneous power dissipated in the resistor is
2 2 2sinm p i R i R t ω = = (7.4)
The average value of p over a cycle is *
2 2 2sinm p i R i R t ω =< >=< >   [7.5(a)]
where the bar over a letter (here, p) denotes its average
value and <......> denotes taking average of the quantity
inside the bracket. Since,  i2
m and R are constants,
2 2sinmp i R t ω = < > [7.5(b)]
Using the trigonometric identity, sin2 wt =
1/2 (1– cos 2 wt), we have < sin2 wt > = (1/2) (1– < cos 2 wt >)
and since < cos2 wt > = 0**, we have,
2 1sin2tω< > =
Thus,
21
2m p i R= [7.5(c)]
To express ac power in the same form as dc power
(P = I2R), a special value of current is defined and used.
It is called, root mean square  (rms) or effective current
(Fig. 7.3) and is denoted by Irms or I.
*The average value of a function F (t) over a period T is given by F tTF t tT
( ) ( )=∫1
0d
**< >= ∫ =

= −[ ]= cos cossinsin 2121 2
21
22 0 0
00ω ωω
ω ωω tTt dtTt
TTT TFIGURE  7.3 The rms current I is related to the
peak  current  im by I = / 2mi  = 0.707  im.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 4 ---
Physics
180It is defined by
2 21
2 2m
miI i i= = =
= 0.707  im(7.6)
In ter ms of  I, the average power , denoted by P is
2 21
2mpP i R I R= = = (7.7)
Similarly, we define the rms voltage  or effective voltage  by
V = 2mv
 = 0.707 vm(7.8)
From Eq. (7.3), we have
vm = imR
or,  2 2m mv iR=
or,  V = IR (7.9)
Equation (7.9) gives the relation between ac current and ac voltage
and is similar to that in the dc case. This shows the advantage of
introducing the concept of rms values. In terms of rms values, the equation
for power [Eq. (7.7)] and relation between current and voltage in ac circuits
are essentially the same as those for the dc case.
It is customary to measure and specify rms values for ac quantities. For
example, the household line voltage of 220 V is an rms value with a peak
voltage of
vm = 2 V =  (1.414)(220 V) = 311 V
In fact, the I or rms current is the equivalent dc current that would
produce the same average power loss as the alternating current. Equation
(7.7) can also be written as
P = V2 / R = I V    (since V = I R)
Example 7.1 A light  bulb is rated at 100W for a 220 V supply. Find
(a) the resistance of the bulb; (b) the peak voltage of the source; and
(c) the rms current through the bulb.
Solution
(a)We are given P = 100 W and V = 220 V . The r esistance of the
bulb is
()22220 V484100 WVRP= = = Ω
(b)The peak voltage of the source is
V 2 311mv V= =
(c)Since, P  = I V
100 W0.454A220 V  PIV EXAMPLE  7.1
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 5 ---
181Alternating Current
7.3REPRESENT ATION OF AC C URRENT  AND VOLTAGE
BY ROTATING VECTORS  — P HASORS
In the previous section, we learnt that the current through  a resistor is
in phase with the ac voltage. But this is not so in the case  of an inductor ,
a capacitor or a combination  of these circuit elements. In order to show
phase relationship between voltage and current
in an ac circuit, we use the notion of phasors .
The analysis of an ac circuit is facilitated by the
use of a phasor diagram. A phasor * is a vector
which rotates about the origin with angular
speed w, as shown in Fig. 7.4. The vertical
components of phasors V and I represent the
sinusoidally varying quantities v and i. The
magnitudes of phasors V and I represent  the
amplitudes or the peak values vm and im of these
oscillating quantities. Figure 7.4(a) shows the
voltage and current phasors and their
relationship at time t1 for the case of an ac source
connected to a resistor i.e., corresponding to the
circuit shown in Fig. 7.1. The projection of
voltage and current phasors on vertical axis, i.e., vm sinw t and im sinw t,
respectively represent the value of voltage and current at that instant. As
they rotate with frequency w, curves in Fig. 7.4(b) are generated.
From Fig. 7.4(a) we see that phasors V and I  for the case of a resistor are
in the same direction. This is so for all times. This means that the phase
angle between the voltage and the current is zero.
7.4  AC V OLTAGE APPLIED TO AN INDUCTOR
Figur e 7.5 shows an ac sour ce connected to an inductor . Usually,
inductors have appreciable resistance in their windings, but we shall
assume that this inductor has negligible resistance.
Thus, the circuit is a purely inductive ac circuit. Let
the voltage across the source be v = vm sinw t. Using
the Kirchhoff’s loop rule, ε( )t=∑ 0, and  since there
is no resistor in the circuit,
d0div Lt− = (7.10)
where the second term  is the self-induced Faraday
emf in the inductor; and L is the self-inductance ofFIGURE  7.4 (a) A phasor diagram for the
circuit in Fig 7.1. (b) Graph of v and
i versus wt.
FIGURE  7.5  An ac source
connected to an inductor .
*Though voltage and current in ac circuit are represented by phasors – rotating
vectors, they are not vectors themselves. They are scalar quantities. It so happens
that the amplitudes and phases of harmonically varying scalars combine
mathematically in the same way as do the projections of rotating vectors of
corresponding magnitudes and directions. The rotating vectors  that represent
harmonically varying scalar quantities are introduced only to provide us with a
simple way of adding these quantities using a rule that we already know.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 6 ---
Physics
182the inductor . The negative sign follows fr om Lenz’s law (Chapter 6).
Combining Eqs. (7.1) and (7.10), we have
dsindmv i vtt L Lω = = (7.11)
Equation (7.11) implies that the equation for i(t), the current as a
function of time, must be such that its slope d i/dt is a sinusoidally varying
quantity, with the same phase as the source voltage and an amplitude
given by vm/L. To obtain the current, we integrate d i/dt with respect to
time:
d
dd di
ttv
Lt tm∫ ∫= sin( )ω
and get,
cos( ) constantmvi tL= − ω +ω
The integration constant has the dimension of current and is time-
independent. Since the source has an emf which oscillates symmetrically
about zero, the current it sustains also oscillates symmetrically about
zero, so that no constant or time-independent component of the current
exists. Therefore, the integration constant is zero.
Using
− = −

 cos( ) sin ω ωt tπ
2, we have
i i tm= −

 sin ωπ
2(7.12)
where  m
mviL=ωis the amplitude of the current. The quantity w L is
analogous to the resistance and is called inductive reactance , denoted
by XL:
XL = w L (7.13)
The amplitude of the current is, then
m
m
LviX= (7.14)
The dimension of inductive reactance is the same as that of resistance
and its SI unit is ohm ( W). The inductive reactance limits the current in a
purely inductive circuit in the same way as the resistance limits the
current in a purely resistive circuit. The inductive reactance is directly
proportional to the inductance and to the frequency of the current.
A comparison of Eqs. (7.1) and (7.12) for the source voltage and the
current in an inductor shows that the current lags the voltage by p/2 or
one-quarter (1/4) cycle. Figure 7.6 (a) shows the voltage and the current
phasors in the present case at instant t1. The current phasor I is p/2
behind the voltage phasor V. When r otated with fr equency w counter -
clockwise, they generate the voltage and current given by Eqs. (7.1) and
(7.12), respectively and as shown in Fig. 7.6(b).Interactive animation on Phasor diagrams of ac circuits containing, R, L, C and RLC series circuits:
http://www.animations.physics.unsw.edu.au//jw/AC.html
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 7 ---
183Alternating Current EXAMPLE  7.2We see that the current reaches its maximum value later than the
voltage by one-fourth of a period T
42=

π/
ω. You have seen that an
inductor has reactance that limits current similar to resistance in a
dc circuit. Does it also consume power like a resistance? Let us try to
find out.
The instantaneous power supplied to the inductor is
p i v i t v tL m m = = −

() sin sin ω ωπ
2×
()() cos sinm mi v t t ω ω = −
() sin 22m mi vtω = −
So, the average power over a complete cycle is
( ) L sin 22m mi vP tω = −
() sin 22m mi vtω = − = 0,
since the average of sin (2 wt) over a complete cycle is  zero.
Thus, the average power supplied to an inductor over one complete
cycle is zero .
Example 7.2  A pure inductor of 25.0 mH is connected to a source of
220 V . Find the inductive r eactance and r ms curr ent in the cir cuit if
the frequency of the source is 50 Hz.
Solution  The inductive reactance,
–= .32 2 3 14 50 25 10νπ × × × × ΩLX L=
      = 7.85 W
The rms current in the circuit is
VA220287.85LVIX= = =ΩFIGURE  7.6 (a) A Phasor diagram for the circuit in Fig. 7.5.
(b) Graph of v and i versus wt.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 8 ---
Physics
1847.5  AC V OLTAGE APPLIED  TO A CAPACITOR
Figure 7.7 shows an ac source e generating ac voltage v = vm sin wt
connected to a capacitor only, a purely capacitive ac circuit.
When a capacitor is connected to a voltage source
in a dc circuit, current will flow for the short time
requir ed to char ge the capacitor . As char ge
accumulates on the capacitor plates, the voltage
across them increases, opposing the current. That is,
a capacitor in a dc circuit will limit or oppose the
current as it charges. When the capacitor is fully
charged, the current in the circuit falls to zero.
When the capacitor is connected to an ac source,
as in Fig. 7.7, it limits or regulates the current, but
does not completely prevent the flow of charge. The
capacitor is alternately charged and discharged as
the current reverses each half cycle. Let q  be the
charge on the capacitor at any time t. The instantaneous voltage v across
the capacitor is
qvC= (7.15)
From the Kirchhoff’s loop rule, the voltage across the source and the
capacitor are equal,
sinmqv tCω=
To find the current, we use the relation d
dqit=
( )d
dsin cos( )m m i v C t C v ttω ω ω = =
Using the relation, cos( ) sin ω ωt t= +

π
2, we have
i i tm= +

 sin ωπ
2(7.16)
where the amplitude of the oscillating curr ent is im = w Cvm. We can r ewrite
it as
(1/ )m
mviCω=
Comparing it to  im= vm/R for a purely resistive circuit, we find that
(1/wC)  plays the role of resistance. It is called capacitive reactance  and
is denoted by Xc,
Xc= 1/ wC (7.17)
so that the amplitude of the current is
m
m
CviX= (7.18)FIGURE  7.7  An ac source
connected to a capacitor .
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 9 ---
185Alternating Current
FIGURE   7.8 (a) A Phasor diagram for the circuit
in Fig. 7.7. (b) Graph of  v and i versus ωt.The dimension of capacitive reactance is the
same as that of resistance and its SI unit is
ohm (Ω). The capacitive reactance limits the
amplitude of the current in a purely capacitive
circuit in the same way as the resistance limits
the current in a purely resistive circuit. But it
is inversely proportional to the frequency and
the capacitance.
A comparison of Eq. (7.16) with the
equation of source voltage, Eq . (7.1) shows that
the current is π/2 ahead of voltage.
Figure 7. 8(a) shows the phasor diagram at an instant t1. Here the current
phasor I is π/2 ahead of the voltage phasor V as they rotate
counterclockwise. Figure 7. 8(b) shows the variation of voltage and current
with time. We see that the current reaches its maximum value earlier than
the voltage by one-fourth of a period.
The instantaneous power supplied to the capacitor is
pc = i v = im cos(ωt)vm sin(ωt)
    = imvm cos(ωt) sin(ωt)
    sin(2 )2m mi vtω = (7.19)
So, as in the case of an inductor, the average power
sin(2 ) sin(2 ) 02 2m m m m
Ci v i vP t t ω ω = = =
since <sin (2 ωt)> = 0 over a complete cycle.
Thus, we see that in the case of an inductor, the current lags the voltage
by π/2 and in the case of a capacitor, the current leads the voltage by π/2.
Example 7.3 A lamp is connected in series with a capacitor. Predict
your observations for dc and ac connections. What happens in each
case if the capacitance of the capacitor is reduced?
Solution When a dc source is connected to a capacitor, the capacitor
gets charged and after charging no current flows in the circuit and
the lamp will not glow. There will be no change even if C is reduced.
With ac source, the capacitor offers capacitative reactance (1/ ωC)
and the current flows in the circuit. Consequently, the lamp will shine.
Reducing C will increase reactance and the lamp will shine less brightly
than before.
Example 7.4 A 15.0 µ F capacitor is connected to a 220 V, 50 Hz source.
Find the capacitive reactance and the current (rms and peak) in the
circuit. If the frequency is doubled, what happens to the capacitive
reactance and the current?
Solution   The capacitive reactance is
F61 12122 2 (50Hz)(15.0 10 )CXCν−= = = Ωπ π ×
The rms current is EXAMPLE  7.3  EXAMPLE  7.4
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 10 ---
Physics
186
 EXAMPLE  7.5  EXAMPLE  7.4VA2201.04212CVIX= = =Ω
The peak current is
2 (1.41)(1.04 ) 1.47mi I A A = = =
This current oscillates between +1.47A and –1.47 A, and is ahead of
the voltage by p/2.
If the frequency is doubled, the capacitive reactance is halved and
consequently, the current is doubled.
Example 7.5  A light bulb and an open coil inductor are connected to
an ac source through a key as shown in Fig. 7.9.
FIGURE  7.9
The switch is closed and after sometime, an iron rod is inserted into
the interior of the inductor . The glow of the light bulb (a) incr eases; (b)
decreases; (c) is unchanged, as the iron rod is inserted. Give your
answer with reasons.
Solution  As the iron rod is inserted, the magnetic field inside the coil
magnetizes the iron increasing the magnetic field inside it. Hence,
the inductance of the coil increases. Consequently, the inductive
reactance of the coil increases. As a result, a larger fraction of the
applied ac voltage appears acr oss the inductor , leaving less voltage
across the bulb. Therefore, the glow of the light bulb decreases.
7.6  AC V OLTAGE APPLIED  TO A SERIES  LCR C IRCUIT
Figure 7.10 shows a series LCR circuit connected to an ac source e. As
usual, we take the voltage of the source to be v = vm sin wt.
If q is the charge on the capacitor and i the
current, at time t, we have, from Kirchhoff’s loop
rule:
d
di qL i R vt C+ + = (7.20)
We want to deter mine the instantaneous
current  i and its phase relationship to the applied
alternating voltage v. We shall solve this pr oblem
by two methods. First, we use the technique of
phasors and in the second method, we solve
Eq. (7.20) analytically to obtain the time–
dependence of i.FIGURE  7.10 A series LCR circuit
connected to an ac source.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 11 ---
187Alternating Current
7.6.1  Phasor-diagram solution
From the cir cuit shown in Fig. 7.10, we see that the r esistor , inductor
and capacitor are in series. Therefore, the ac current in each element is
the same at any time, having the same amplitude and phase. Let it be
i = im sin(wt+f) (7.21)
where f is the phase difference between the voltage across the source and
the current in the circuit. On the basis of what we have learnt in the previous
sections, we shall construct a phasor diagram for the present case.
Let I be the phasor representing the current in the circuit as given by
Eq. (7.21). Further , let VL, VR, VC, and V represent the voltage acr oss the
inductor , resistor , capacitor and the sour ce, respectively. Fr om pr evious
section, we know that VR is parallel to I, VC is p/2
behind I and VL is  p/2 ahead of I. VL, VR, VC and I
are shown in Fig. 7.11(a) with apppropriate phase-
relations.
The length of these phasors or the amplitude
of VR, VC and VL are:
vRm = im R, vCm = im XC, vLm = im XL(7.22)
The voltage Equation (7.20) for the circuit can
be written as
vL + vR + vC = v (7.23)
The phasor relation whose vertical component
gives the above equation is
VL + VR + VC = V (7.24)
This relation is represented in Fig. 7.11(b). Since
VC  and VL are always along the same line and in
opposite directions, they can be combined into a single phasor ( VC + VL)
which has a magnitude ½vCm – vLm½. Since V is represented as the
hypotenuse of a right-triangle whose sides are VR and ( VC + VL), the
pythagorean theorem gives:
( )2 2 2
m Rm Cm Lmv v v v= + −
Substituting the values of vRm, vCm, and vLm from Eq. (7.22) into the above
equation, we have
2 2 2( ) ( )m m m C m L v i R i X i X= + −
     = + −i R X Xm C L2 2 2( )
or,  2 2( )m
m
C Lvi
R X X=
+ −[7.25(a)]
By analogy to the resistance in a circuit, we introduce the impedance Z
in an ac circuit:
m
mviZ= [7.25(b)]
where 2 2( )C L Z R X X= + − (7.26)FIGURE  7.11 (a) Relation between the
phasors VL, VR, VC, and I, (b) Relation
between the  phasors VL, VR, and ( VL + VC)
for the circuit in Fig. 7.10.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 12 ---
Physics
188Since phasor I is always parallel to phasor VR, the phase angle f
is the angle between VR and V and can be determined from
Fig. 7.12:
tanCm Lm
Rmv v
vφ−=
Using Eq. (7.22), we have
tanC LX X
Rφ−= (7.27)
Equations (7.26) and (7.27) are graphically shown in Fig. (7.12).
This is called Impedance diagram which is a right-triangle with
Z as its hypotenuse.
Equation 7.25(a) gives the amplitude of the current and Eq. (7.27)
gives the phase angle. With these, Eq. (7.21) is completely specified.
If XC > XL, f is positive and the circuit is predominantly capacitive.
Consequently, the current in the circuit leads the source voltage. If
XC < XL, f is negative and the circuit is predominantly inductive.
Consequently, the current in the circuit lags  the source voltage.
Figure 7.1 3 shows the phasor diagram and variation of v and i with w t
for the case XC > XL.
Thus, we have obtained the amplitude
and phase of current for an LCR series circuit
using the technique of phasors. But this
method of analysing ac circuits suffers from
certain disadvantages. First, the phasor
diagram say nothing about the initial
condition. One can take any arbitrary value
of t (say, t1, as done throughout this chapter)
and draw different phasors which show the
relative angle between different phasors.
The solution so obtained is called the
steady-state solution . This is not a general
solution. Additionally, we do have a
transient solution  which exists even for
v = 0. The general solution is the sum of the
transient solution and the steady-state
solution. After a sufficiently long time, the effects of the transient solution
die out and the behaviour of the circuit is described by the steady-state
solution.
7.6.2  Resonance
An interesting characteristic of the series RLC circuit is the phenomenon
of resonance. The phenomenon of resonance is common among systems
that have a tendency to oscillate at a particular frequency. This frequency
is called the system’s natural frequency . If such a system is driven by an
energy source at a frequency that is near the natural frequency, the
amplitude of oscillation is found to be large. A familiar example of this
phenomenon is a child on a swing. The swing has a natural frequency
for swinging back and forth like a pendulum. If the child pulls on theFIGURE  7.12  Impedance
diagram.
FIGURE  7.13 (a) Phasor diagram of V and I.
(b) Graphs of v and i versus w t for a series LCR
circuit where XC > XL.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 13 ---
189Alternating Current
rope at regular intervals and the frequency of the pulls is almost the
same as the frequency of swinging, the amplitude of the swinging will
be large.
For an RLC circuit driven with voltage of amplitude vm and frequency
w, we found that the current amplitude is given by
2 2( )m m
m
C Lv viZ R X X= =
+ −
with Xc = 1/ wC and XL = w L. So if w is varied, then at a particular frequency
w0, Xc = XL, and the impedance is minimum ( )2 20 Z R R= + = . This
frequency is called the resonant frequency :
0
01orc LX X LCωω= =
or   01
LCω= (7.28)
At resonant frequency, the current amplitude
is maximum; im = vm/R.
Figure 7.16 shows the variation of im with w
in a RLC series circuit with L = 1.00 mH, C =
1.00 nF for two values of R: (i) R = 100 W
and (ii)  R = 200 W. For the source applied vm =
100 V . w0 for this case is 1
LC  
     = 1.00×106
rad/s.
We see that the current amplitude is
maximum at the resonant frequency. Since im =
vm / R at resonance, the current amplitude for
case (i) is twice to that for case (ii).
Resonant circuits have a variety of applications, for example, in the
tuning  mechanism of a radio or a TV set. The antenna of a radio accepts
signals from many broadcasting stations. The signals picked up in the
antenna acts as a source in the tuning circuit of the radio, so the circuit
can be driven at many frequencies. But to hear one particular radio
station, we tune the radio. In tuning, we vary the capacitance of a
capacitor in the tuning circuit such that the resonant frequency of the
circuit becomes nearly equal to the frequency of the radio signal received.
When this happens, the amplitude of the current with the frequency of
the signal of the particular radio station in the circuit is maximum.
It is important to note that resonance phenomenon is exhibited by a
circuit only if both L and C are present in the circuit. Only then do the
voltages across L and C cancel each other (both being out of phase)
and the current amplitude is vm/R, the total source voltage appearing
across R. This means that we cannot have resonance in a RL or
RC circuit.FIGURE  7.14 Variation of  im with w for two
cases:  (i) R = 100 W, (ii) R = 200 W,
L = 1.00 mH .
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 14 ---
Physics
190Example 7.6  A resistor of 200 W and a capacitor of 15.0 mF are
connected in series to a 220 V, 50 Hz ac source. (a) Calculate the
current in the circuit; (b) Calculate the voltage (rms) across the
resistor and the capacitor . Is the algebraic sum of these voltages
more than the source voltage? If yes, resolve the paradox.
Solution
Given
F6200 , 15.0 15.0 10 FR C−= Ω = µ = ×
220 V, 50HzV ν = =
(a) In order to calculate the current, we need the impedance of
the circuit. It is
2 2 2 2(2 )C Z R X R C πν−= + = +
   F2 6 2(200 ) (2 3.14 50 15.0 10 )− −= Ω + × × × ×
   2 2(200 ) (212.3 )= Ω + Ω
   291.67= Ω
Therefore, the current in the circuit is
V2200.755 A291.5VIZ= = =Ω
(b) Since the current is the same throughout the circuit, we have
(0.755 A)(200 ) 151VRV I R= = Ω =
(0.755 A)(212.3 ) 160.3 VC CV I X= = Ω =
The algebraic sum of the two voltages, VR and VC is 311.3 V which
is mor e than the sour ce voltage of 220 V . How to r esolve this
paradox? As you have learnt in the text, the two voltages are not
in the same phase. Therefore, they cannot be added  like ordinary
numbers . The two voltages are out of phase by ninety degrees.
Therefore, the total of these voltages must be obtained using the
Pythagorean theorem:
2 2
R C R CV V V+= +
= 220 V
Thus, if the phase difference between two voltages is properly taken
into account, the total voltage across the resistor and the capacitor
is equal to the voltage of the source. EXAMPLE  7.6
7.7  P OWER IN AC C IRCUIT : THE POWER FACTOR
We have seen that a voltage v = vm sinwt applied to a series RLC circuit
drives a current in the circuit given by i = im sin( wt + f) where
m
mviZ=   and φ=−

−tan1X X
RC L
Therefore, the instantaneous power p supplied by the source is
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 15 ---
191Alternating Current
( )[ ] sin sin( )m m p v i v t i t ω ω φ = = × +
[ ] cos cos(2 )2m mv it φ ω φ = − + (7.29)
The average power over a cycle is given by the average of the two terms in
R.H.S. of Eq. (7.29). It is only the second term which is time-dependent.
Its average is zero (the positive half of the cosine cancels the negative
half). Therefore,
cos2m mv iP φ = cos
2 2m mv iφ =
cosV Iφ = [7.30(a)]
This can also be written as,
2cos P I Z φ = [7.30(b)]
So, the average power dissipated depends not only on the voltage and
current but also on the cosine of the phase angle φ between them. The
quantity cos φ is called the power factor . Let us discuss the following
cases:
Case (i) Case (i) Case (i) Case (i) Case (i) Resistive circuit : If the circuit contains only pure R, it is called
resistive . In that case  φ = 0, cos φ = 1. There  is maximum power dissipation.
Case (ii) Case (ii) Case (ii) Case (ii) Case (ii) Purely inductive or capacitive circuit : If the circuit contains
only an inductor or capacitor, we know that the phase difference between
voltage and current is π/2. Therefore, cos φ = 0, and no power is dissipated
even though a current is flowing in the circuit. This current is sometimes
referred to as wattless current .
Case (iii) Case (iii) Case (iii) Case (iii) Case (iii) LCR series circuit : In an LCR series circuit, power dissipated is
given by Eq. (7.30) where φ = tan–1 (Xc – XL )/ R. So,  φ may be non-zero  in
a RL or RC or RCL circuit. Even in such cases, power is dissipated only in
the resistor.
Case (iv) Case (iv)Case (iv) Case (iv)Case (iv)  Power dissipated at resonance in LCR circuit : At resonance
Xc – XL= 0, and φ = 0. Therefore, cos φ = 1 and P = I2Z = I2 R. That is,
maximum power is dissipated in a circuit (through R) at resonance.
Example 7.7 Example 7.7 Example 7.7 Example 7.7 Example 7.7 (a) For circuits used for transporting electric power, a
low power factor implies large power loss in transmission. Explain.
(b) Power factor can often be improved by the use of a capacitor of
appropriate capacitance in the circuit. Explain.
Solution SolutionSolution SolutionSolution  (a) We know that P = I V cos φ where cos φ is the power factor.
To supply a given power at a given voltage, if cos φ is small, we have to
increase current accordingly. But this will lead to large power loss
(I2R) in transmission.
(b)Suppose in a circuit, current I lags the voltage by an angle φ. Then
power factor cos φ =R/Z.
We can improve the power factor (tending to 1) by making Z tend to
R. Let us understand, with the help of a phasor diagram (Fig. 7.15) E  E E  E EXAMPLE XAMPLEXAMPLE XAMPLEXAMPLE  7.7  7.7 7.7  7.7 7.7
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 16 ---
Physics
192how this can be achieved. Let us resolve I into two components. Ip
along the applied voltage V and Iq perpendicular to the applied
voltage. Iq as you have learnt in Section 7.7, is called the wattless
component since corresponding to this component of current, there
is no power loss.  IP  is known as the power component because it is
in phase with the voltage and corresponds to power loss in the circuit.
It’s clear fr om this analysis that if we want to impr ove power factor ,
we must completely neutralize the lagging wattless current Iq by an
equal leading wattless current I¢q. This can be done by connecting
a capacitor of appropriate value in parallel so that Iq and I¢q cancel
each other and P is ef fectively Ip V.
Example 7.8  A sinusoidal voltage of peak value 283 V and frequency
50 Hz is applied to a series LCR circuit in which
R = 3 W, L = 25.48 mH, and C = 796 mF. Find (a) the impedance of the
circuit; (b) the phase difference between the voltage across the source
and the current; (c) the power dissipated in the circuit; and (d) the
power factor .
Solution
(a) To find the impedance of the circuit, we first calculate XL and XC.
XL = 2 pnL
    = 2 × 3.14 × 50 × 25.48 × 10–3 W = 8 W
1
2CXCν=π
6142 3.14 50 796 10−= = Ω× × × ×
Therefore,
2 2 2 2( ) 3 (8 4)L C Z R X X= + − = + −
    = 5 W
(b)Phase difference, f = tan–1 C LX X
R−
=−

= − °−tan .14 8
353 1 EXAMPLE  7.8FIGURE  7.15 EXAMPLE  7.7
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 17 ---
193Alternating Current EXAMPLE  7.9Since f is negative, the current in the circuit lags the voltage
across the source.
(c)The power dissipated in the circuit is
2P I R=
Now, Iim= =

=
21
2283
540A
Therefore, A W2(40 ) 3 4800P= × Ω =
(d)Power factor =  cos cos –53.1 0.6  
Example 7.9 Suppose the frequency of the source in the previous
example can be varied. (a) What is the frequency of the source at
which resonance occurs? (b) Calculate the impedance, the current,
and the power dissipated at the resonant condition.
Solution
(a)The frequency at which the resonance occurs is
03 61 1
25.48 10 796 10 LCω
− −= =
× × ×
     222.1rad/s=
0221.1Hz 35.4Hz2 2 3.14rων= = =π ×
(b)The impedance Z at resonant condition is equal to the resistance:
3 Z R= = Ω
The rms current at resonance is
= = =

=V
ZV
R283
21
366 7 . A
The power dissipated at resonance is
2 2(66.7) 3 13.35 kW P I R= × = × =
You can see that in the pr esent case, power dissipated
at resonance is more than the power dissipated in Example 7.8. EXAMPLE  7.8  EXAMPLE  7.10Example 7.10 At an airport, a person is made to walk through the
doorway of a metal detector , for security r easons. If she/he is carrying
anything made of metal, the metal detector emits a sound. On what
principle does this detector work?
Solution   The metal detector works on the principle of resonance in
ac cir cuits. When you walk thr ough a metal detector , you ar e,
in fact, walking through a coil of many turns. The coil is connected to
a capacitor tuned so that the circuit is in resonance. When
you walk through with metal in your pocket, the impedance of the
circuit changes – resulting in significant change in current in the
circuit. This change in current is detected and the electronic circuitry
causes a sound to be emitted as an alarm.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 18 ---
Physics
1947.8  T RANSFORMERS
For many purposes, it is necessary to change (or transform) an alternating
voltage from one to another of greater or smaller value. This is done with
a device called transfor mer using the principle of mutual induction.
A transfor mer consists of two sets of coils, insulated fr om each other .
They are wound on a soft-iron core, either one on top of the other as in
Fig. 7.16(a) or on separate limbs of the core as in Fig. 7.16(b). One of the
coils called the primary coil  has Np turns. The other coil is called the
secondary coil ; it has Ns turns. Often the primary coil is the input coil
and the secondary coil is the output coil of the transfor mer.
FIGURE  7.16 Two arrangements for winding of primary and secondary coil in a transformer:
(a) two coils on top of each other , (b) two coils on separate limbs of the cor e.
When an alternating voltage is applied to the  primary, the resulting
current produces an alternating magnetic flux which links the secondary
and induces an emf in it. The value of this emf depends on the number of
turns in the secondary. W e consider an ideal transfor mer in which the
primary has negligible resistance and all the flux in the core links both
primary and secondary windings. Let f be the flux in each turn in the core
at time t due to current in the primary when a voltage vp is applied to it.
Then the induced emf or voltage es, in the secondary with  Ns turns is
d
ds s Ntφε= − (7.31)
The alternating flux f also induces an emf, called back emf in the
primary. This is
d
dp p Ntφε= − (7.32)
But ep = vp. If this were not so, the primary current would be infinite
since the  primary has zero resistance (as assumed). If the secondary is
an open circuit or the current taken from it is small, then to a good
approximation
es = vs
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 19 ---
195Alternating Current
where  vs is the voltage across the secondary. Therefore, Eqs. (7.31) and
(7.32) can be written as
s sdv Nd tφ= − [7.31(a)]
p pdv Nd tφ= − [7.32(a)]
From Eqs. [7.31 (a)] and [7.32 (a)], we have
s s
p pv N
v N=(7.33)
Note that the above relation has been obtained using three
assumptions: (i) the primary resistance and current are small; (ii) the
same flux links both the primary and the secondary as very little flux
escapes from the core, and (iii) the secondary current is small.
If the transformer is assumed to be 100% efficient (no energy losses),
the power input is equal to the power output, and since p = i v,
ipvp = isvs(7.34)
Although some energy is always lost, this is a good approximation,
since a well designed transformer may have an efficiency of more than
95%. Combining Eqs. (7.33) and (7.34), we have
p s s
s p pi v N
i v N= =(7.35)
Since i and v both oscillate with the same frequency as the ac source,
Eq. (7.35) also gives the ratio of the amplitudes or rms values of
corresponding quantities.
Now, we can see how a transformer affects the voltage and current.
We have:
VN
NVss
pp =

   and  IN
NIsp
sp =

 (7.36)
That is, if the secondary coil has a greater number of turns than the
primary ( Ns > Np), the voltage is stepped up  (Vs > Vp). This type of
arrangement is called a step-up transfor mer. However , in this arrangement,
there is less current in the secondary than in the primary ( Np/Ns < 1 and Is
< Ip). For example, if the primary coil of a transformer has 100 turns and
the secondary has 200 turns,  Ns/Np = 2 and Np/Ns=1/2. Thus, a 220V
input at 10A will step-up to 440 V output at 5.0 A.
If the secondary coil has less turns than the primary ( Ns < Np),
we have a step-down transfor mer. In this case, Vs < Vp and Is > Ip. That
is, the voltage is stepped down, or reduced, and the current
is increased.
The equations obtained above apply to ideal transformers (without
any energy losses). But in actual transformers, small energy losses do
occur due to the following reasons:
(i)Flux Leakage : There is always some flux leakage; that is, not all of
the flux due to primary passes through the secondary due to poor
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 20 ---
Physics
196SUMMARY
1.An alternating voltage sin= ωm v v t  applied to a resistor R drives a
current i = im sinwt in the r esistor , m
mviR= . The curr ent is in phase with
the applied voltage.
2.For an alternating current i  = im sin wt passing through a resistor R , the
average power loss P  (averaged over a cycle) due to joule heating is
(1/2)i2
mR. To express it in the same form as the dc power ( P = I2R), a
special value of current is used. It is called root mean square (rms)
current and is donoted by I:
0.707
2m
miI i = =
Similarly, the rms voltage is defined by
0.707
2m
mvV v = =
We have P = IV = I2R
3.An ac voltage v  = vm sin wt applied to a pure inductor L, drives a current
in the inductor i = im sin ( wt – p/2), where im = vm/XL. XL = wL is called
inductive reactance . The current in the inductor lags the voltage by
p/2. The average power supplied to an inductor over one complete cycle
is zero.design of the core or the air gaps in the core. It can be reduced by
winding the primary and secondary coils one over the other .
(ii)Resistance of the windings : The wire used for the windings has some
resistance and so, energy is lost due to heat produced in the wire
(I 2R). In high current, low voltage windings, these are minimised by
using thick wire.
(iii)Eddy currents : The alternating magnetic flux induces eddy currents
in the iron core and causes heating. The effect is reduced by using a
laminated core.
(iv)Hysteresis : The magnetisation of the core is repeatedly reversed by
the alternating magnetic field. The resulting expenditure of energy in
the core appears as heat and is kept to a minimum by using a magnetic
material which has a low hysteresis loss.
The large scale transmission and distribution of electrical energy over
long distances is done with the use of transformers. The voltage output
of the generator is stepped-up (so that current is reduced and
consequently, the I2R loss is cut down). It is then transmitted over long
distances to an area sub-station near the consumers. There the voltage
is stepped down. It is further stepped down at distributing sub-stations
and utility poles before a power supply of 240 V reaches our homes.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 21 ---
197Alternating Current
4.An ac voltage v = vm sinwt applied to a capacitor drives a current in the
capacitor:  i = im sin (wt + p/2). Here,
1,m
m C
Cvi XX C ω= =  is called capacitive reactance .
The current through the capacitor is p /2 ahead of the applied voltage.
As in the case of inductor , the average power supplied to a capacitor
over one complete cycle is zero.
5.For a series RLC circuit driven by voltage v = vm sin  wt, the current is
given by i = im sin (wt + f)
where
( )2 2m
m
C Lvi
R X X=
+ −
and1tanC LX X
Rφ−−=
( )2 2
C L Z R X X= + −  is called the impedance of the circuit.
The average power loss over a complete cycle is given by
P = V I cosf
The ter m cosf is called the power factor .
6.In a purely inductive or capacitive circuit, cos f = 0 and no power is
dissipated even though a current is flowing in the circuit. In such cases,
current is referred to as a wattless current .
7.The phase relationship between current and voltage in an ac circuit
can be shown conveniently by representing voltage and current by
rotating vectors called phasors . A phasor is a vector which rotates
about the origin with angular speed w. The magnitude of a phasor
represents the amplitude or peak value of the quantity (voltage or
current) r epresented by the phasor .
The analysis of an ac circuit is facilitated by the use of a phasor
diagram.
8.A transformer consists of an iron core on which are bound a primary
coil of Np turns and a secondary coil of Ns turns. If the primary coil is
connected to an ac source, the primary and secondary voltages are
related by
VN
NVss
pp =


and the currents are related by
IN
NIsp
sp =


If the secondary coil has a greater number of turns than the primary, the
voltage is stepped-up (Vs > Vp). This type of arrangement is called a step-
up transfor mer. If the secondary coil has tur ns less than the primary, we
have a step-down transfor mer.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 22 ---
Physics
198 Physical quantity Symbol Dimensions Unit Remarks
rms voltage V [M L2 T–3 A–1] V V = 
2mv, vm is the
amplitude of the ac voltage.
rms current I [ A] A I = 
2mi, im is the amplitude of
the ac current.
Reactance:
     Inductive XL[M L2 T–3 A–2] XL = L
     Capacitive XC[M L2 T–3 A–2] XC = 1/ C
Impedance Z [M L2 T–3 A–2] Depends on elements
present in the circuit.
Resonant wr or w0[T–1] Hz w0 LC1  for a
frequency
series RLC circuit
Quality factor Q Dimensionless0
01 LQR C Rω
ω= =  for a series
RLC circuit.
Power factor Dimensionless = cos f, f is the phase
difference between voltage
applied and current in
the circuit.
POINTS TO PONDER
1.When a value is given for ac voltage or current, it is ordinarily the rms
value. The voltage across the terminals of an outlet in your room is
normally 240 V. This refers to the rms value of the voltage. The amplitude
of this voltage is
V 2 2(240) 340mv V= = =
2.The power rating of an element used in ac circuits refers to its average
power rating.
3.The power consumed in an ac circuit is never negative.
4.Both alternating current and direct current are measured in amperes.
But how is the ampere defined for an alternating current? It cannot be
derived from the mutual attraction of two parallel wires carrying ac
currents, as the dc ampere is derived. An ac current changes direction
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 23 ---
199Alternating Current
with the source frequency and the attractive force would average to
zero. Thus, the ac ampere must be defined in terms of some property
that is independent of the direction of the current. Joule heating
is such a property, and there is one ampere of rms value of
alternating current in a circuit if the current produces the same
average heating effect as one ampere of dc current would produce
under the same conditions.
5.In an ac circuit, while adding voltages across different elements, one
should take care of their phases properly. For example, if VR and VC
are voltages across R and C, respectively in an RC circuit, then the
total voltage across RC combination is 2 2
RC R CV V V= +  and not
VR + VC since VC is p/2 out of phase of VR.
6.Though in a phasor diagram, voltage and current are represented by
vectors, the se quantities are not really vectors themselves. They are
scalar quantities. It so happens that the amplitudes and phases of
harmonically varying scalars combine mathematically in the same
way as do the projections of rotating vectors of corresponding
magnitudes and directions. The ‘rotating vectors’ that represent
harmonically varying scalar quantities are introduced only to provide
us with a simple way of adding these quantities using a rule that
we already know as the law of vector addition.
7.There are no power losses associated with pure capacitances and pure
inductances in an ac circuit. The only element that dissipates energy
in an ac  circuit is the resistive element.
8.In a RLC circuit, resonance phenomenon occur when XL = XC or
01
LCω= . For r esonance to occur , the pr esence of both L and C
elements in the circuit is a must. With only one of these ( L or C)
elements, there is no possibility of voltage cancellation and hence ,
no resonance is possible.
9.The power factor in a RLC circuit is a measure of how close the
circuit is to expending the maximum power .
10.In generators and motors, the roles of input and output are
reversed. In a motor , electric ener gy is the input and mechanical
energy is the output. In a generator , mechanical ener gy is the
input and electric energy  is the output. Both devices simply
transfor m ener gy fr om one for m to another .
11.A transformer (step-up) changes a low-voltage into a high-voltage.
This does not violate the law of conservation of energy. The
current is reduced by the same proportion.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 24 ---
Physics
200EXERCISES
7.1 A 100 W resistor is connected to a 220 V, 50 Hz ac supply.
(a)What is the rms value of current in the circuit?
(b)What is the net power consumed over a full cycle?
7.2 (a)The peak voltage of an ac supply is 300 V . What is the r ms voltage?
(b)The rms  value of current in an ac circuit is 10 A. What is the
peak current?
7.3 A 44 mH inductor is connected to 220 V, 50 Hz ac supply. Determine
the rms value of the current in the circuit.
7.4  A 60 mF capacitor is connected to a 110 V, 60 Hz ac supply. Determine
the rms value of the current in the circuit.
7.5 In Exercises 7.3 and 7.4, what is the net power absorbed by each
circuit over a complete cycle. Explain your answer .
7.6 A char ged 30 mF capacitor is connected to a 27 mH inductor . What is
the angular frequency of free oscillations of the circuit?
7.7 A series LCR circuit with R = 20 W, L = 1.5 H and C = 35 mF is connected
to a variable-frequency 200 V ac supply. When the frequency of the
supply equals the natural frequency of the circuit, what is the average
power transferred to the circuit in one complete cycle?
7.8 Figure 7.17 shows a series LCR circuit connected to a variable
frequency 230 V sour ce. L = 5.0 H, C = 80mF, R = 40 W.
(a)Determine the source frequency which drives the circuit in
resonance.
(b)Obtain the impedance of the circuit and the amplitude of current
at the resonating frequency.
(c)Determine the rms potential drops across the three elements of
the circuit. Show that the potential drop across the LC
combination is zero at the resonating frequency.FIGURE  7.17
Reprint 2025-26