--- Page 1 ---
4.1  I NTRODUCTION
Both Electricity and Magnetism have been known for more than 2000
years. However , it was only about 200 years ago, in 1820, that it was
realised that they were intimately related. During a lecture demonstration
in the summer of 1820, Danish physicist Hans Christian Oersted noticed
that a current in a straight wire caused a noticeable deflection in a nearby
magnetic compass needle. He investigated this phenomenon. He found
that the alignment of the needle is tangential to an imaginary circle which
has the straight wire as its centre and has its plane perpendicular to the
wire. This situation is depicted in Fig.4.1(a). It is noticeable when the
current is large and the needle sufficiently close to the wire so that the
earth’s magnetic field may be ignored. Reversing the direction of the
current reverses the orientation of the needle [Fig. 4.1(b)]. The deflection
increases on increasing the current or bringing the needle closer to the
wire. Iron filings sprinkled around the wire arrange themselves in
concentric circles with the wire as the centre [Fig. 4.1(c)]. Oersted
concluded that moving charges or currents produced a magnetic field
in the surrounding space .
Following this, there was intense experimentation. In 1864, the laws
obeyed by electricity and magnetism were unified and formulated byChapter Four
MOVING CHARGES
AND MAGNETISM
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 2 ---
Physics
108James Maxwell who then realised that light was electromagnetic waves.
Radio waves were discovered by Hertz, and produced by  J.C.Bose and
G. Marconi by the end of the 19th century. A  remarkable scientific and
technological progress took place in the 20th century. This was due to
our increased understanding of electromagnetism and the invention of
devices for production, amplification, transmission and detection of
electromagnetic waves.
In this chapter , we will see how magnetic field exerts
forces on moving charged particles, like electrons, protons,
and curr ent-carrying wir es. W e shall also lear n how
currents pr oduce magnetic fields. We shall see how
particles can be accelerated to very high energies in a
cyclotr on. W e shall study how curr ents and voltages ar e
detected by a galvanometer .
In this and subsequent Chapter on magnetism,
we adopt the following convention:  A current or a
field (electric or magnetic) emerging out of the plane of the
paper is depicted by a dot ( ¤). A current or a field going
into the plane of the paper is depicted by a cross ( )*.
Figures. 4.1(a) and 4.1(b) correspond to these two
situations, respectively.
4.2  M AGNETIC F ORCE
4.2.1  Sources and fields
Before we introduce the concept of a magnetic field B, we
shall recapitulate what we have learnt in Chapter 1 about
the electric field E. We have seen that the interaction
between two charges can be considered in two stages.
The charge Q, the source of the field, produces an electric
field E, whereFIGURE  4.1 The magnetic field due to a straight long current-carrying
wire. The wir e is perpendicular to the plane of the paper . A ring of
compass needles surrounds the wire. The orientation of the needles is
shown when (a) the curr ent emer ges out of the plane of the paper ,
(b) the curr ent moves into the plane of the paper . (c) The arrangement of
iron filings around the wire. The darkened ends of the needle represent
north poles. The effect of the earth’s magnetic field is neglected.
*A dot appears like the tip of an arrow pointed at you, a cross is like the feathered
tail of an arrow moving away from you.Hans Christian Oersted
(1777–1851)  Danish
physicist and chemist,
professor at Copenhagen.
He observed that a
compass needle suffers a
deflection when placed
near a wire carrying an
electric current. This
discovery gave the first
empirical evidence of a
connection between electric
and magnetic phenomena.HANS CHRISTIAN OERSTED  (1777– 1851)
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 3 ---
109Moving Charges and
Magnetism
E = Q ˆr/ (4pe0)r2(4.1)
where ˆr is unit vector along r,  and  the field E is a vector
field. A charge q interacts with this field and experiences
a force F given by
F  =  q  E   = q Q ˆr  / (4pe0) r2(4.2)
As pointed out in the Chapter 1, the field E is not just
an artefact but has a physical role. It can  convey  energy
and momentum and is not established instantaneously
but takes finite time to propagate. The concept of a field
was specially stressed by Faraday  and was incorporated
by Maxwell in his unification of electricity and magnetism.
In addition to depending on each point in space, it can
also vary with time, i.e., be a function of time.  In our
discussions in this chapter , we will assume that the fields
do not change with time.
The field at a particular point can be due to one or
more charges. If there are more charges the fields add
vectorially. Y ou have alr eady lear nt in Chapter 1 that this
is called the principle of superposition. Once the field is
known, the force on a test charge is given by Eq. (4.2).
Just as static charges produce an electric field, the
currents or moving charges produce (in addition) a
magnetic field, denoted by B (r), again a vector field. It
has several basic properties identical to the electric field.
It is defined at each point in space (and can in addition
depend on time). Experimentally, it is found to obey the
principle of superposition: the magnetic field of several
sources is the vector addition of magnetic field of each
individual source .
4.2.2  Magnetic Field,  Lorentz  Force
Let us suppose that there is  a point charge q (moving
with a velocity v and, located at r at a given time t) in
presence of both the electric field E (r) and the magnetic
field B (r).  The force on an electric charge q due to both
of them can be written as
F   = q [ E (r) +  v × B (r)] º Felectric +Fmagnetic(4.3)
This force was given first  by H.A. Lorentz based on the extensive
experiments of Amper e and others. It is called the Lorentz for ce. You
have already studied in detail the force due to the electric field. If we
look at the interaction with the magnetic field, we find the following
features.
(i)It depends on q, v and B (charge of the particle, the velocity and the
magnetic field). Force on a negative charge is opposite to that on a
positive charge.
(ii)The magnetic force q [ v × B ] includes a vector product of velocity
and magnetic field. The vector product makes the force due to magneticHENDRIK ANTOON LORENTZ  (1853 – 1928)Hendrik Antoon Lorentz
(1853  – 1928)  Dutch
theoretical physicist,
professor at Leiden.  He
investigated  the
relationship between
electricity, magnetism,  and
mechanics. In order to
explain the observed effect
of magnetic fields on
emitters of light (Zeeman
effect), he postulated the
existence of electric charges
in the atom, for which he
was awarded the Nobel Prize
in 1902. He derived a set of
transformation equations
(known after him, as
Lorentz transformation
equations) by some tangled
mathematical arguments,
but he was not aware that
these equations hinge on a
new concept of space and
time.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 4 ---
Physics
110field vanish (become zero) if  v elocity and magnetic field are parallel
or anti-parallel. The force acts in a (sideways) direction perpendicular
to both the velocity and the magnetic field. Its
direction  is given by the screw rule or right hand
rule  for vector (or cross) product as illustrated
in Fig. 4.2.
(iii) The magnetic force is zero if  charge is not
moving (as then | v|= 0).  Only a moving
charge feels the magnetic force.
The expression for the magnetic force helps
us to define the unit of the magnetic field, if one
takes q, F and v, all to be unity in the force
equation F = q [ v × B ] =q v B sin q ˆn,  where q is
the angle between  v and B [see  Fig. 4.2 (a)]. The
magnitude of magnetic field B is 1 SI unit, when
the force acting on a unit charge (1 C), moving
perpendicular to B with a speed 1m/s,  is one
newton.
Dimensionally, we have [ B] = [ F/qv] and the unit
of B are Newton second / (coulomb metre).  This unit is called tesla (T)
named after Nikola Tesla (1856 – 1943). Tesla is a rather large unit. A
smaller  unit (non-SI) called gauss  (=10–4 tesla) is also often used. The
earth’s magnetic field is about 3.6 × 1 0–5 T.
4.2.3  Magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor
We can extend the analysis for for ce due to magnetic field on a single
moving ch arge to a straight rod carrying current. Consider a rod of a
unifor m cross-sectional ar ea A and length l. We shall assume one kind
of mobile carriers as in a conductor (here electrons). Let the number
density of these mobile charge carriers in it be n. Then the total number
of mobile charge carriers in it is nlA. For a steady current I in this
conducting rod, we may assume that each mobile carrier has an average
drift velocity vd (see Chapter 3). In the presence of an external magnetic
field B, the force on these carriers is:
F = (nlA)q vd ´ ´´ ´´ B
wher e q is the value of the char ge on  a carrier .  Now nq vd is the curr ent
density j and |( nq vd)|A is the current I (see Chapter 3 for the discussion
of current and current density). Thus,
F = [(nq vd )lA] × B = [ jAl ] ´´´
´´ B
   = Il ´ ´´ ´´ B (4.4)
where l  is a vector of magnitude l , the length of the rod, and with a direction
identical to the curr ent I. Note that the curr ent I is not a vector . In the last
step leading to Eq. (4.4), we have transferred the vector sign from  j to l.
Equation (4.4) holds for a straight rod. In this equation, B is the
external magnetic field. It is not the field produced by the current-carrying
rod. If the wire has an arbitrary shape we can calculate the Lorentz force
on it by considerin g it as a collection of linear strips d lj and summing
j
jId × F Bl
This summation can be converted to an integral in most cases.FIGURE  4.2 The direction of the magnetic
force acting on a charged particle. (a) The
force on a positively charged particle with
velocity v and making an angle q with the
magnetic field B is given by the right-hand
rule. (b) A moving charged particle q is
deflected in an opposite sense to –q in the
presence of magnetic field.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 5 ---
111Moving Charges and
Magnetism EXAMPLE  4.1Example 4.1  A straight wire of mass 200 g and length 1.5 m carries
a current of 2 A. It is suspended in mid-air by a uniform horizontal
magnetic field B (Fig. 4.3). What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field?
FIGURE  4.3
Solution   From Eq. (4.4), we find that ther e is an upwar d force F, of
magnitude IlB,. For mid-air suspension, this must be balanced by
the force due to gravity:
m g = I lB
  m gBI l=
     0.2 9.80.65 T2 1.5×= =×
Note that it would have been sufficient to specify m/ l, the mass per
unit length of the wire. The earth’s magnetic field is approximately
4 × 10–5 T and we have ignored it.
Example 4.2 If the magnetic field is parallel to the positive y-axis
and the charged particle is moving along the positive x-axis (Fig. 4.4),
which way would the Lorentz force be for (a) an electron (negative
charge), (b) a proton (positive charge).
FIGURE  4.4
Solution    The velocity v of particle is along the x-axis, while B, the
magnetic field is along the y-axis, so v × B is along the z-axis (screw
rule or right-hand thumb rule). So, (a) for electron it will be along – z
axis. (b) for a positive charge (proton) the force is along + z axis. EXAMPLE  4.2Charged particles moving in a magnetic field.
Interactive demonstration:
http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~teb/optics/java/partmagn/index.html
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 6 ---
Physics
1124.3  M OTION IN A MAGNETIC  FIELD
We will now consider , in greater detail, the motion of a charge moving in
a  magnetic field.  We have learnt  in Mechanics (see Class XI book, Chapter
5) that a force on a particle does work if  the force has a component along
(or opposed to) the direction of motion of the particle. In the case of motion
of a charge in a magnetic field, the magnetic force is perpendicular to the
velocity of the particle. So no work is done and no change in the magnitude
of the velocity is produced (though the direction of momentum may be
changed). [Notice that this is unlike the force due to an electric field, qE,
which can have a component parallel (or antiparallel) to motion and thus
can transfer energy in addition to momentum.]
We shall consider motion of a charged particle in a unifor m magnetic
field. First consider the case of v perpendicular to  B.  The
perpendicular force, q v × B , acts as a centripetal force and
produces a circular motion perpendicular to the magnetic field.
The particle will describe a circle if v and B are  perpendicular
to each other (Fig. 4.5).
If velocity has a component along B, this component
remains unchanged as the motion along the magnetic field will
not be affected by the magnetic field. The motion in a plane
perpendicular to B is as before a circular one, thereby producing
a helical motion  (Fig. 4.6).
You have already learnt in earlier classes (Se e Class XI ,
Chapter 3) that if r is the radius of the circular path of a particle,
then a force of  m v2 / r, acts perpendicular to the path towards
the centre of the circle, and is called the  centripetal force. If the
velocity v is perpendicular to the magnetic field   B, the  magnetic
force is  perpendicular to both  v and B and acts like a
centripetal force. I t has a magnitude q v B .
Equating the two expressions for centripetal
force,
m v 2/r = q v B, which gives
r =  m v / qB (4.5)
for the radius of the circle described by the
charged particle. The larger the  momentum,  the
larger is the radius and bigger the circle
described. If w is the angular frequency, then   v
= w  r. So,
w  = 2p n =  q B/ m [4.6(a)]
which is independent of the velocity or energy .
Here n is the frequency of rotation. The
independence of n from energy has important
application in the design of a cyclotron.
The time taken for one revolution is T= 2p/
w  º 1/n. If there is a  component of the velocity
parallel to the magnetic field (denoted by v||),
it will make the particle move along the field and the path of theFIGURE  4.5 Circular motion
FIGURE  4.6 Helical motion
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 7 ---
113Moving Charges and
Magnetism EXAMPLE  4.3Example  4.3   What is the radius of the path of an electron (mass
9 × 10-31 kg and charge 1.6  × 10–19 C) moving at a speed of  3 ×107 m/s in
a magnetic field of 6  × 10–4 T perpendicular to it?  What is its
frequency?  Calculate its energy in  keV. ( 1 eV = 1.6  × 10–19 J).
Solution  Using Eq. (4.5) we find
r  = m v / (qB)  = 9 ×10–31 kg × 3 × 107  m s–1 / ( 1.6 × 10–19 C × 6 × 10–4 T)
                      = 28 × 10–2 m = 28 cm
n = v / (2 pr) = 17×106 s–1   = 17×106  Hz   =17 MHz.
E = (½ ) mv 2   = (½ ) 9 × 10–31 kg ×  9 × 1014 m2/s2  = 40.5 ×10–17 J
  ≈ 4×10–16 J = 2.5 keV.particle would be a helical one (Fig. 4.6). The distance moved along
the magnetic field  in one rotation is called pitch p.  Using Eq. [4.6 (a)],
we have
p =   v||T  =  2pm v|| / q B [4.6(b)]
The radius of the circular component of motion is called the radius
of the helix.
4.4MAGNETIC  FIELD DUE TO A CURRENT
ELEMENT , BIOT -SAVART
 LAW
All magnetic fields that we know are due to currents (or moving
charges) and due to intrinsic magnetic moments of particles.
Here, we shall study the relation between current and the
magnetic field it produces. It is given by the Biot-Savart’s  law.
Fig. 4.7 shows a finite conductor XY carrying current I. Consider
an infinitesimal element d l of the conductor . The magnetic field
dB due to this element is to be determined at a point P which is at
a distance r from it. Let q be the angle between d l and the
displacement vector r. According to Biot-Savart’ s law , the
magnitude of the magnetic field d B is proportional to the current
I, the element length |d l|, and inversely proportional to the square
of the distance r. Its direction * is perpendicular to the plane
containing d l and r . Thus, in vector notation,
dI d
rBr∝×l
3
           =×µ0
34πI d
rlr
 [4.7(a)]
where m0/4p is a constant of proportionality. The above expression
holds when the medium is vacuum.FIGURE  4.7 Illustration of
the Biot-Savart law. The
current element I dl
produces a field d B at a
distance r. The Ä sign
indicates that the
field is perpendicular
to the plane of this
page and directed
into it.*The sense of  d l×r is also given by the Right Hand Screw rule  : Look at the
plane containing vectors d l and r. Imagine moving from the first vector towards
second vector . If the movement is anticlockwise, the resultant is towards you.
If it is clockwise, the resultant is away from you.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 8 ---
Physics
114
 EXAMPLE  4.4The magnitude of this field is,
µ θ=π0
2d sind4I l
rB [4.7(b)]
where we have used the property of cross-product. Equation [4.7 (a)]
constitutes our basic equation for the magnetic field.  The proportionality
constant in SI units has the exact value,
7 010 Tm/A4µ−=π[4.7(c)]
We call µ0 the permeability of free space (or vacuum).
The Biot-Savart law for the magnetic field has certain similarities, as
well as, differences with the Coulomb’s law for the electrostatic field. Some
of these are:
(i)Both are long range, since both depend inversely on the square of
distance from the source to the point of interest. The principle of
superposition applies to both fields. [In this connection, note that
the magnetic field is linear in the source I dl just as the electrostatic
field is linear in its source: the electric charge.]
(ii)The electrostatic field is produced by a scalar source, namely, the electric
charge. The magnetic field is produced by a vector source I dl.
(iii)The electrostatic field is along the displacement vector joining the
source and the field point. The magnetic field is perpendicular to the
plane containing the displacement vector r and the current element I dl.
(iv)There is an angle dependence in the Biot-Savart law which is not
present  in the electrostatic case. In Fig. 4.7, the magnetic field at any
point in  the direction of d l (the dashed line) is zero. Along this line,
θ = 0, sin θ = 0 and from Eq. [4.7(a)], |d B| = 0.
There is an interesting  relation between ε0, the permittivity of free
space; µ0, the permeability of free space; and c , the speed of light in vacuum:
( )0
0 0 0 44µε µ ε  = π     π ( )7
91109 10−   =    ×8 2 21 1
(3 10 ) c= =×
We will discuss this connection further in Chapter 8 on the
electromagnetic waves. Since the speed of light in vacuum is constant,
the product µ0ε0 is fixed in magnitude. Choosing the value of either ε0 or
µ0, fixes the value of the other. In SI units, µ0 is fixed to  be equal to
4π × 10–7
 in magnitude.
Example 4.4  An element ˆ ∆ = ∆ xi l  is placed at the origin and carries
a large current I = 10 A (Fig. 4.8). What is the magnetic field on the y-
axis at a distance of 0.5 m. ∆x = 1 cm.
FIGURE  4.8
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 9 ---
115Moving Charges and
Magnetism
Solution
 0
2d sin|d |4I l
rµ θ=πB  [using Eq. (4.7)]
2d 10 ml x−= Δ = , I = 10 A,  r = 0.5 m = y, 7
0T m/4 10Aµ−π =
θ = 90° ; sin θ = 1
7 2
210 10 10d25 10− −
−× ×=×B = 4 × 10–8 T
The direction of the field is in the + z-direction. This is so since,
ˆ ˆ d = ∆× i × j x yrl ()ˆ ˆ y x= Δ i × j ˆ y x= Δ k
We remind you of the following cyclic property of cross-products,
ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ; ;× = × = × =i j k j k i k i j
Note that the field is small in magnitude.
In the next section, we shall use the Biot-Savart law to calculate the
magnetic field due to a circular loop.
4.5 MAGNETIC  FIELD ON THE AXIS OF A CIRCULAR
CURRENT  LOOP
In this section, we shall evaluate the magnetic field  due
to a circular coil along its axis. The evaluation entails
summing up the effect of infinitesimal current elements
(I dl) mentioned in the previous section. We assume that
the current I is steady and that the evaluation is carried
out in free space (i.e., vacuum).
Fig. 4.9 depicts a circular loop carrying a steady
current I. The loop is placed in the  plane with its
centre at the origin O and has a radius R. The  x-axis is
the axis of the loop. We wish to calculate the magnetic
field at the point P on this axis. Let x be the distance of P
from the centre O of the loop.
Cons ider a conducting element d l of the loop. This is
shown in Fig. 4. 9. The magnitude d B of the magnetic
field due to d l is given by the Biot-Savart law [Eq. 4. 7(a)],
0
34=× rI ddB
rµ
πl
(4.8)
Now r2 = x2 + R2 . Further, any element of the loop
will be perpendicular to the displacement vector from
the element to the axial point. For example, the element d l in Fig. 4.9 is
in the  plane, whereas, the displacement vector r from dl  to the  axial
point P is in the  plane. Hence | dl × r|=r dl. Thus,
 ( )π0
2 2dd4I lB
x Rµ=
+(4.9)FIGURE  4.9 Magnetic field on the
axis of a current carrying circular
loop of radius R. Shown are the
magnetic field dB (due to a line
element dl ) and its
components along and
perpendicular to the axis. EXAMPLE  4.4
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 10 ---
Physics
116The direction of d B is shown in Fig. 4.9. It is perpendicular to the
plane formed by d l and r. It has an x-component d Bx and a component
perpendicular to x-axis, d B⊥. When the components perpendicular to
the x-axis are summed over, they cancel out and we obtain a null result.
For example, the d B⊥ component due to d l is cancelled by the
contribution due to the diametrically opposite d l element, shown in
Fig. 4.9. Thus, only the x-component survives. The net contribution along
x-direction can be obtained by integrating d Bx  = dB cos θ over the loop.
For Fig. 4.9,
2 2 1/2cos( )R
x Rθ=+ (4.10)
From Eqs. (4.9) and (4.10),
( )π0
3/22 2dd4xI l RB
x Rµ=
+
The summation of elements d l over the loop yields 2 πR, the
circumference of the loop. Thus, the magnetic field at P due to entire
circular loop is
( )2
0
3/22 2ˆ ˆ
2xI RB
x Rµ= =
+B i i(4.11)
As a special case of the above result, we may obtain the field at the centre
of the loop. Here  x = 0, and we obtain,
0
0ˆ
2I
Rµ=B i (4.12)
The magnetic field lines due to a circular wire form closed loops and
are shown in Fig. 4.10. The direction of the magnetic field is given by
(another) right-hand thumb rule  stated below:
Curl the palm of your right hand around the circular wire with the
fingers pointing in the direction of the current. The right-hand thumb
gives the direction of the magnetic field.
FIGURE  4.10  The magnetic field lines for a current loop. The direction of
the field is given by the right-hand thumb rule described in the text. The
upper side of the loop may be thought of as the north pole and the lower
side as the south pole of a magnet.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 11 ---
117Moving Charges and
Magnetism EXAMPLE  4.5Example 4.5  A straight wire carrying a current of 12 A is bent into a
semi-circular arc of radius 2.0 cm as shown in Fig. 4.11(a). Consider
the magnetic field B at the centre of the arc. (a) What is the magnetic
field due to the straight segments? (b) In what way the contribution
to B from the semicircle differs from that of a circular loop and in
what way does it resemble?  (c) Would your answer be different if the
wire were bent into a semi-circular arc of the same radius but in the
opposite way as shown in Fig. 4.11(b)?
FIGURE  4.11
Solution
(a)dl and r for each element of the straight segments are parallel.
Therefore, d l × r = 0. Straight segments do not contribute to
|B|.
(b)For all segments of the semicircular arc, d l × r are all parallel to
each other (into the plane of the paper). All such contributions
add up in magnitude. Hence direction of B for a semicircular arc
is given by the right-hand rule and magnitude is half that of a
circular loop. Thus B is 1.9  × 10–4 T normal to the plane of the
paper going into it.
(c)Same magnitude of B but opposite in direction to that in (b).
Example 4.6  Consider a tightly wound 100 turn coil of radius 10
cm, carrying a current of 1 A. What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field at the centre of the coil?
Solution Since the coil is tightly wound, we may take each circular
element to have the same radius R = 10 cm = 0.1 m. The number of
turns N = 100. The magnitude of the magnetic field is,
–7 2
0
–14 10 10 1
2 2 10NIBRµ π× × ×= =×42 10−= π ×46 28 10 T.−= ×
4.6  AMPERE’ S CIRCUITAL  LAW
There is an alternative and appealing way in which the
Biot-Savart law may be expressed. Ampere’s circuital law
considers an open surface with a boundary (Fig. 4.12).
The surface has current passing through it. We consider
the boundary to be made up of a number of small line
elements. Consider one such element of length dl. We
take the value of the tangential component of the
magnetic field, Bt, at this element and multiply it by theFIGURE  4.12 EXAMPLE  4.6
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 12 ---
Physics
118length of that element dl [Note: Btdl=B.dl]. All such
products are added together. We consider the limit as the
lengths of elements get smaller and their number gets
larger. The sum then tends to an integral. Ampere’s   law
states that this integral is  equal to µ0 times the total
current passing through  the surface,  i.e.,
“B.dl = µ0I [4.13(a)]
where I  is the total current through the surface. The
integral is taken over the closed loop coinciding with the
boundary C of the surface. The relation above involves a
sign-convention, given by the right-hand rule. Let the
fingers of the right-hand be curled in the sense the
boundary is traversed in the loop integral “B.dl. Then
the direction of the thumb gives the sense in which the
current I  is regarded as positive.
For several applications, a much simplified version of
Eq. [4.13(a)] proves sufficient. We shall assume that, in
such cases, it is possible to choose the loop (called
an amperian loop ) such that at each point of the
loop, either
(i)B is tangential to the loop and is a non-zero constant
B, or
(ii)B is normal to the loop, or
(iii)B vanishes.
Now, let L be the length (part) of the  loop for which B
is tangential . Let Ie  be the current enclosed by the loop.
Then, Eq. (4.13) reduces to,
BL =µ0Ie[4.13(b)]
When there is a system with a symmetry such as for
a straight infinite current-carrying wire  in Fig. 4.13, the
Ampere’s law enables an easy evaluation of the magnetic
field, much the same way Gauss’ law helps in
determination of the electric field. This is exhibited in the
Example 4.8 below. The boundary of the loop chosen is
a circle and magnetic field is tangential to the
circumference of the circle. The law gives, for the left hand
side of Eq. [4.13 (b)], B. 2 πr. We find that the magnetic
field at a distance r outside the wire is tangential and
given by
B × 2πr  =  µ0 I,
B = µ0  I/ (2πr) (4.14)
The above result for the infinite wire  is interesting
from several points of view.ANDRE AMPERE  (1775 –1836)Andre Ampere (1775 –
1836) Andre Marie Ampere
was a French physicist,
mathematician and chemist
who founded the science of
electrodynamics. Ampere
was a child prodigy
who mastered advanced
mathematics by the age of
12. Ampere grasped the
significance of Oersted’s
discovery. He carried out a
large series of experiments
to explore the relationship
between current electricity
and magnetism. These
investigations culminated
in 1827 with the
publication of the
‘Mathematical Theory of
Electrodynamic Pheno-
mena Deduced Solely from
Experiments’. He hypo-
thesised that all magnetic
phenomena are due to
circulating electric
currents. Ampere was
humble and absent-
minded. He once forgot an
invitation to dine with the
Emperor Napoleon. He died
of pneumonia at the age of
61. His gravestone bears
the epitaph: Tandem Feli x
(Happy at last).
(i) It implies that the field at every point on a circle of
radius r, (with the wire along the axis), is same in
magnitude. In other words, the magnetic field
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 13 ---
119Moving Charges and
Magnetism EXAMPLE  4.7possesses what is called a cylindrical symmetry . The field that
normally can depend on three coordinates depends only on one: r.
Whenever there is symmetry, the solutions simplify.
(ii) The field direction at any point on this circle is tangential to it.
Thus, the lines of constant magnitude of magnetic field form
concentric circles. Notice now, in Fig. 4.1(c), the iron filings form
concentric circles. These lines called magnetic field lines  form closed
loops. This is unlike the electrostatic field lines which originate
from positive charges and end at negative charges. The expression
for the magnetic field of a straight wire provides a theoretical
justification to Oersted’s experiments.
(iii) Another interesting point to note is that even though the wire is
infinite, the field due to it at a non-zero distance is not infinite. It
tends to blow up only when we come very close to the wire. The
field is directly proportional to the current and inversely
proportional to the distance from the (infinitely long) current source.
(iv) There exists a simple rule to determine the direction of the magnetic
field due to a long wire. This rule, called the  right-hand rule *, is:
Grasp the wire in your right hand with your extended thumb pointing
in the dir ection of the curr ent. Y our fingers will curl ar ound in the
direction of the magnetic field.
Ampere’s circuital law is not new in content from Biot-Savart law.
Both relate the magnetic field and the current, and both express the same
physical consequences of a steady electrical current. Ampere’s law is to
Biot-Savart law, what Gauss’s law is to Coulomb’s law. Both, Ampere’s
and Gauss’s law relate a physical quantity on the periphery or boundary
(magnetic or electric field) to another physical quantity, namely, the source,
in the interior (current or charge). We also note that Ampere’s circuital
law holds for steady currents which do not fluctuate with time. The
following example will help us understand what is meant by the term
enclosed  current.
Example 4.7  Figure 4.13 shows a long straight wire of a circular
cross-section (radius a) carrying steady current I. The current I is
uniformly distributed across this cross-section. Calculate the
magnetic field in the region r < a and r > a.
FIGURE  4.13
*Note that there are two distinct  right-hand rules: One which gives the direction
of B on the axis of current-loop and the other which gives direction of B
for a straight conducting wire. Fingers and thumb play different roles in
the two.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 14 ---
Physics
120
 EXAMPLE  4.7Solution (a) Consider the case r > a. The Amperian loop, labelled 2,
is a circle concentric with the cross-section. For this loop,
L  = 2 π r
Ie = Current enclosed by the loop = I
The result is the familiar expression for a long straight wire
B (2π r) = µ0I
π 0
2IBrµ= [4.15(a)]
1Br∝ (r > a)
Now the current enclosed Ie is not I, but is less than this value.
Since the current distribution is uniform, the current enclosed is,
I Ir
ae=

π
π2
2 2
2Ir
a=
Using Ampere’s law, π2
0 2(2 )I rB raµ=
BI
ar =

µ0
22π[4.15(b)]
B ∝ r      (r < a)
FIGURE  4.14
Figure (4.14) shows a plot of the magnitude of B with distance r
from the centre of the wire. The direction of the field is tangential to
the respective circular loop (1 or 2) and given by the right-hand
rule described earlier in this section.
This example possesses the required symmetry so that Ampere’s
law can be applied readily.
It should be noted that while Ampere’s circuital law holds for any
loop, it may not always facilitate an evaluation of the magnetic field in
every case. For example, for the case of the circular loop discussed in
Section 4.5, it cannot be applied to extract the simple expression
B = µ0I/2R [Eq. (4.12)] for the field at the centre of the loop. However,
there exists a large number of situations of high symmetry where the law
can be conveniently applied. We shall use  it in the next section to calculate
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 15 ---
121Moving Charges and
Magnetism
the magnetic field produced by a commonly used and very useful
magnetic system: the solenoid .
4.7  T HE SOLENOID
We shall discuss a long solenoid. B y long solenoid we mean that the
solenoid’s length is large compared to its radius. It consists of a long wire
wound in the form of a helix where the neighbouring turns are closely
spaced. So each turn can be regarded as a circular loop.  The net magnetic
field is the vector sum of the fields due to all the turns. Enamelled wires
are used for winding so that turns are insulated from each other .
Figure 4.1 5 displays the magnetic field lines for a finite solenoid. We
show a section of this solenoid in an enlarged manner  in Fig. 4.1 5(a).
Figure  4.15(b) show s the entire finite solenoid with its magnetic field. In
Fig. 4.1 5(a), it is clear from the circular loops that the field  between two
neighbouring turns vanishes. In Fig. 4.1 5(b), we see that the field at the
interior mid-point P is uniform, strong and along the axis of the solenoid.
The field at the exterior mid-point Q is weak and moreover is along the
axis of the solenoid with no perpendicular or normal component. As theFIGURE  4.15  (a) The magnetic field due to a section of the solenoid which has been
stretched out for clarity. Only the exterior semi-circular part is shown. Notice
how the circular loops between neighbouring turns tend to cancel.
(b) The magnetic field of a finite solenoid.
FIGURE  4.16 The magnetic field of a very long solenoid. W e consider a
rectangular Amperian loop abcd to determine the field.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 16 ---
Physics
122
 EXAMPLE  4.8solenoid is made longer it appears like a long cylindrical metal sheet.
Figure 4.1 6 represents this idealised picture. The field outside the solenoid
approaches zero. We shall assume that the field outside is zero. The field
inside becomes everywhere parallel to the axis.
Consider a rectangular Amperian loop abcd. Along cd the field is zero
as argued above. Along transverse sections bc and ad, the field component
is zero. Thus, these two sections  make no contribution. Let the field along
ab be B. Thus, the relevant length of the Amperian loop is, L = h.
Let n be the number of turns per unit length, then the total number
of turns is  nh. The enclosed current is,  Ie = I (n h), where I is the current
in the solenoid. From Ampere’s circuital law [Eq. 4.13 (b)]
BL =  µ0Ie,    B h = µ0I (n h)
B = µ0 n I (4.16)
The direction of the field is given by the right-hand rule. The solenoid
is commonly used to obtain a uniform magnetic field. We shall see in the
next chapter that a large field is possible by inserting a soft iron core
inside the solenoid.
Example 4.8  A solenoid of length 0.5 m has a radius of 1 cm and is
made up of 500 turns. It carries a current of 5 A. What is the
magnitude of the magnetic field inside the solenoid?
Solution  The number of turns per unit length is,
50010000.5n= =  turns/m
The length l = 0.5 m and radius r = 0.01 m. Thus,  l/a = 50 i.e., l >> a.
Hence, we can use the long solenoid formula, namely, Eq. (4.20)
B = µ0n I
   = 4π × 10–7 × 103 × 5
   = 6.28  × 10–3 T
FIGURE  4.17 Two long straight
parallel conductors carrying steady
currents Ia and Ib and separated by a
distance d. Ba is the magnetic field
set up by conductor ‘a’ at conductor ‘b’.4.8 F ORCE BETWEEN  TWO PARALLEL
CURRENTS , THE AMPERE
We have learnt that there exists a magnetic field due to a
conductor carrying a current which obeys the Biot-Savart
law. Further, we have learnt that an external magnetic field
will exert a force on a current-carrying conductor. This
follows from the Lorentz force formula. Thus, it is logical
to expect that two current-carrying conductors placed near
each other will exert (magnetic) forces on each other. In
the period 1820-25, Ampere studied the nature of this
magnetic force and its dependence on the magnitude of
the current, on the shape and size of the conductors, as
well as, the distances between the conductors. In this
section, we shall take the simple example of two parallel
current- carrying conductors, which will perhaps help us
to appreciate Ampere’s painstaking work.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 17 ---
123Moving Charges and
Magnetism
Figure 4.17 shows two long parallel conductors a and b separated
by a distance d and carrying (parallel) currents Ia and Ib, respectively.
The conductor ‘a’ produces,  the same magnetic field Ba at all points
along the conductor ‘b’. The right-hand rule tells us that the direction of
this field is downwards (when the conductors are placed horizontally).
Its magnitude is given by Eq. [4.15(a)] or from Ampere’s circuital law,
0
2a
aIBdµ=π
The conductor ‘b’ carrying a current Ib will experience a sideways
force due to the  field Ba. The direction of this force is towards the
conductor ‘a’ (Verify this). We label this force as Fba, the force on a
segment L of ‘b’ due to ‘a’. The magnitude of this force is given by
Eq. (4.4),
=ba b aF I LB
      µ
π=0
2a bI ILd(4.17)
It is of course possible to compute the force on ‘a’ due to ‘b’. From
considerations similar to above we can find the force Fab, on a segment of
length L of ‘a’ due to the current in ‘b’. It  is equal in magnitude to Fba,
and directed towards ‘b’. Thus,
Fba = –Fab(4.18)
Note that this is consistent with Newton’s third Law. Thus, at least for
parallel conductors and steady currents, we have shown that the
Biot-Savart law and the Lorentz force yield results in accordance with
Newton’s third Law *.
We have seen from above that currents flowing in the same direction
attract each other. One can show that oppositely directed currents repel
each other. Thus,
Parallel currents attract, and antiparallel currents repel.
This rule is the opposite of what we find in electrostatics. Like (same
sign) charges repel each other, but like (parallel) currents attract each other.
Let fba represent the magnitude of the force Fba per unit length. Then,
from Eq. (4.17),
π0
2a b
baI Ifdµ= (4.19)
The above expression is used to define the ampere (A), which is one of
the seven SI base units.
*It turns out that when we have time-dependent currents and/or charges in
motion, Newton’s third law may not hold for forces between charges and/or
conductors. An essential consequence of the Newton’s third law in mechanics
is conservation of momentum of an isolated system. This, however, holds even
for the case of time-dependent situations with electromagnetic fields, provided
the momentum carried by fields is also taken into account.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 18 ---
Physics
124
 EXAMPLE  4.9The ampere  is the value of that steady current which, when maintained
in each of the two very long, straight, parallel conductors of negligible
cross-section, and placed one metre apart in vacuum, would produce
on  each of these conductors a force equal to  2 × 10–7 newtons per metre
of length.
This definition of the ampere was adopted in 1946. It is a theoretical
definition. In practice, one must eliminate the effect of the earth’s magnetic
field and substitute very long wires by multiturn coils of appropriate
geometries. An instrument called the current balance is used to measure
this mechanical force.
The SI unit of charge, namely, the coulomb, can now be defined in
terms of the ampere.
When a steady current of 1A is set up in a conductor, the quantity of
charge that flows through its cross-section in 1s is one coulomb (1C).
Example 4.9  The horizontal component of the earth’s magnetic field
at a certain place is 3.0 ×10–5 T and the direction of the field is from
the geographic south to the geographic north. A very long straight
conductor is carrying a steady current of 1A. What is the force per
unit length on it when it is placed on a horizontal table and the
direction of the current is (a) east to west; (b) south to north?
Solution   F = Il × B
F = IlB sinθ
The force per unit length is
f = F/l = I B sinθ
(a)When the current is flowing from east to west,
θ = 90°
Hence,
f = I B
  = 1 × 3 × 10–5 = 3 × 10–5 N m–1
This is larger than the value 2×10–7 Nm–1 quoted in the definition
of the ampere. Hence it is important to eliminate the effect of the
earth’s magnetic field and other stray fields while standardising
the ampere.
The direction of the force is downwards. This direction may be
obtained by the directional property of cross product of vectors.
(b)When the current is flowing from south to north,
θ = 0o
f = 0
Hence there is no force on the conductor.
4.9  T ORQUE  ON CURRENT  LOOP, MAGNETIC  DIPOLE
4.9.1 Torque on a rectangular current loop in a uniform
magnetic field
We now show that a rectangular loop carrying a steady current I and
placed in a uniform magnetic field experiences a torque. It does not
experience a net force. This behaviour is analogous to that of electric
dipole in a uniform electric field (Section 1.11).
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 19 ---
125Moving Charges and
Magnetism
We first consider the simple case when the
rectangular loop is placed such that the uniform
magnetic field B is in the plane of the loop. This is
illustrated in Fig. 4.18(a).
The field exerts no force on the two arms AD and BC
of the loop. It is perpendicular to the arm AB of the loop
and exerts a force F1 on it which is directed into the
plane of the loop. Its magnitude is,
F1 = I b B
Similarly, it exerts a force F2 on the arm CD and F2
is directed out of the plane of the paper.
F2 = I b B = F1
Thus, the net force  on the loop is zero . There is a
torque on the loop due to the pair of forces F1 and F2.
Figure 4.18(b) shows a view of the loop from the AD
end. It shows that the torque on the loop tends to rotate
it anticlockwise. This torque is (in magnitude),
1 22 2a aF Fτ= +
( )2 2a aIbB IbB I ab B= + =
    = I A B (4.20)
where A = ab is the area of the rectangle.
We next consider the case when the plane of the loop,
is not along the magnetic field, but makes an angle with
it. We take the angle between the field and the normal to
the coil to be angle θ (The previous case corresponds to
θ = π/2). Figure 4.19 illustrates this general case.
The forces on the arms BC and DA are equal, opposite, and act along
the axis of the coil, which connects the centres of mass of BC and DA.
Being collinear along the axis they cancel each other, resulting in no net
force or torque. The forces on arms AB and CD are F1 and F2. They too
are equal and opposite, with magnitude,
F1 = F2 = I b B
But they are not collinear!  This results in a couple as before. The
torque is, however, less than the earlier case when plane of loop was
along the magnetic field. This is because the perpendicular distance
between the forces of the couple has decreased. Figure 4.19(b) is a view
of the arrangement from the AD end and it illustrates these two forces
constituting a couple. The magnitude of the torque on the loop is,
1 2 sin sin2 2a aF Fτ θ θ= +
= I ab B sin θ
   = I A B sin θ (4.21)FIGURE  4.18  (a) A rectangular
current-carrying coil in uniform
magnetic field. The magnetic moment
m points downwards. The torque τ ττ ττ is
along the axis and tends to rotate the
coil anticlockwise. (b) The couple
acting on the coil.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 20 ---
Physics
126
 EXAMPLE  4.10As θ à 0, the perpendicular distance between
the forces of the couple also approaches zero. This
makes the forces collinear and the net force and
torque zero. The torques in Eqs. (4.20) and (4.21)
can be expressed as vector product of the magnetic
moment of the coil and the magnetic field.
We define the magnetic moment of the current
loop as,
m = I A (4.22)
where the direction of the area vector A is given
by the right-hand thumb rule and is directed into
the plane of the paper in Fig. 4.18. Then as the
angle between m and B is θ ,  Eqs. (4.20) and (4.21)
can be expressed by one expression
(4.23)
This  is analogous to the electrostatic case
(Electric dipole of dipole moment pe in an electric
field E).
τ=p E×e
As is clear from Eq. (4.22), the dimensions of the
magnetic moment are [A][L2] and its unit is Am2.
From Eq. (4.23), we see that the torque τ ττ ττ
vanishes when  m is either parallel or antiparallel
to the magnetic field B. This indicates a state of
equilibrium as there is no torque on the coil (this
also applies to any object with a magnetic moment
m). When  m and B are parallel the equilibrium is
a stable one. Any small rotation of the coil
produces a torque which brings it back to its original position. When
they are antiparallel, the equilibrium is unstable as any rotation produces
a torque which increases with the amount of rotation. The presence of
this torque is also the reason why a small magnet or any magnetic dipole
aligns itself with the external magnetic field.
If the loop has N closely wound turns, the expression for torque, Eq.
(4.23), still holds, with
m = N I A (4.24)
Example 4.10  A 100 turn closely wound circular coil of radius 10
cm carries a current of 3.2 A. (a) What is the field at the centre of the
coil? (b) What is the magnetic moment of this coil?
The coil is placed in a vertical plane and is free to rotate about a
horizontal axis which coincides with its diameter. A uniform magnetic
field of 2T in the horizontal direction exists such that initially the axis
of the coil is in the direction of the field. The coil rotates through an
angle of 90° under the influence of the magnetic field. (c) What are the
magnitudes of the torques on the coil in the initial and final position?
(d) What is the angular speed acquired by the coil when it has rotated
by 90°? The moment of inertia of the coil is 0.1 kg m2.FIGURE 4.19  (a) The area vector of the loop
ABCD makes an arbitrary angle θ with
the magnetic field. (b) Top view of
the loop. The forces F1 and F2 acting
on the arms AB and CD
are indicated.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 21 ---
127Moving Charges and
MagnetismEXAMPLE  4.11 EXAMPLE  4.10Solution
(a)From Eq. (4.12)
0
2NIBRµ=
Here, N = 100; I = 3.2 A, and R = 0.1 m. Hence,
 =× ×
×−
−4 10 10
2 105
1     (using π × 3.2 = 10)
    = 2 × 1 0–3 T
The direction is given by the right-hand thumb rule.
(b)The magnetic moment is given by Eq. (4.24),
m = N I A = N I π r2 = 100 × 3.2 × 3.14 × 10–2 = 10 A m2
The direction is once again given by the right-hand thumb rule.
(c)τ = m × B   [from Eq. (4.23)]
   = m B sin θ
Initially, θ = 0. Thus, initial torque τi = 0. Finally, θ = π/2 (or 90 º).
Thus, final torque τf = m B = 10 × 2 = 20 N m.
(d) From Newton’s second law,
I  
where I  is the moment of inertia of the coil. From chain rule,
d d d d
d d d d= =t tω ω θ ωωθ θ
Using this,
I  d sin d=m B ω ω θ θ
Integrating from θ = 0 to θ = π/2,
Example 4.11
(a)A current-carrying circular loop lies on a smooth horizontal plane.
Can a uniform magnetic field be set up in such a manner that
the loop turns around itself (i.e., turns about the vertical axis).
(b)A current-carrying circular loop is located in a uniform external
magnetic field. If the loop is free to turn, what is its orientation
of stable equilibrium? Show that in this orientation, the flux of
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 22 ---
Physics
128
 EXAMPLE  4.11the total field (external field + field produced by the loop) is
maximum.
 (c)A loop of irregular shape carrying current is located in an external
magnetic field. If the wire is flexible, why does it change to a
circular shape?
Solution
(a)No, because that would require τ ττ ττ to be in the vertical direction.
But τ ττ ττ = I A × B, and since A of the horizontal loop is in the vertical
direction, τ would be in the plane of the loop for any B.
(b)Orientation of stable equilibrium is one where the area vector A
of the loop is in the direction of external magnetic field. In this
orientation, the magnetic field produced by the loop is in the same
direction as external field, both normal to the  plane of the loop,
thus giving rise to maximum flux of the total field.
(c)It assumes circular shape with its plane normal to the field to
maximise flux, since for a given perimeter, a circle encloses greater
area than any other shape.
4.9.2  Circular current loop as a magnetic dipole
In this section, we shall consider the elementary magnetic element: the
current loop. We shall show that the magnetic field (at large distances)
due to current in a circular current loop is very similar in behaviour to
the electric field of an electric dipole. In Section 4.5, we have evaluated
the magnetic field on the axis of a circular loop, of a radius R, carrying a
steady current I. The magnitude of this field is [(Eq. (4.11)],
( )µ=
+2
0
3/22 22I RB
x R
and its direction is along the axis and given by the right-hand thumb
rule (Fig. 4.10). Here,  x is the distance along the axis from the centre of
the loop. For  x >> R, we may drop the R2 term in the denominator. Thus,
µ=2
0
32IRBx
Note that the area of the loop A = πR2. Thus,
µ=π0
32IABx
As earlier, we define the magnetic moment m to have a magnitude IA,
m  = I A. Hence,
Bm≃µ0
32πx
    πµ=0
32
4xm
[4.25(a)]
The expression of Eq. [4.25(a)] is very similar to an expression obtained
earlier for the electric field of a dipole. The similarity may be seen if we
substitute,
 µ ε→0 01/
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 23 ---
129Moving Charges and
Magnetism
e→m p  (electrostatic dipole)
 →B E   (electrostatic field)
We then obtain,
3
02
4e
xε=πpE
which is precisely the field for an electric dipole at a point on its axis.
considered in Chapter 1, Section 1.9 [Eq. (1.20)].
It can be shown that the above analogy can be carried further. We
had found in Chapter 1 that the electric field on the perpendicular bisector
of the dipole is given by [See Eq.(1.21)],
E≃pe
x403πε
where x is the distance from the dipole. If we replace p à m and 0 01/µ ε→
in the above expression, we obtain the result for B for a point in the
plane of the loop at a distance x  from the centre. For  x >>R,
Bm≃µ0
34πxx R ; >> [4.25(b)]
The results given by Eqs. [4.25(a)] and [4.25(b)] become exact for a
point magnetic dipole.
The results obtained above can be shown to apply to any planar loop:
a planar current loop is equivalent to a magnetic dipole of dipole moment
m = I A, which is the analogue of electric dipole moment p. Note, however,
a fundamental difference: an electric dipole is built up of two elementary
units — the charges (or electric monopoles). In magnetism, a magnetic
dipole (or a current loop) is the most elementary element. The equivalent
of electric charges, i.e., magnetic monopoles, are not known to exist.
We have shown that a current loop (i) produces a magnetic field (see
Fig. 4 .10) and behaves like a magnetic dipole at large distances, and
(ii) is subject to torque like a magnetic needle. This led Ampere to suggest
that all magnetism is due to circulating currents. This seems to be partly
true and no magnetic monopoles have been seen so far. However,
elementary particles such as an electron or a proton also carry an intrinsic
magnetic moment, not accounted by circulating currents.
4.10  THE  MOVING  C
OIL GALVANOMETER
Curre nts and voltages in circuits have been discussed extensively in
Chapters 3. But how do we measure them? How do we claim that
current in a circuit is 1.5 A or the voltage drop across a resistor is 1.2 V?
Figure 4.20 exhibits a very useful instrument for this purpose: the moving
coil galvanometer  (MCG). It is a device whose principle can be understood
on the basis of our discussion in Section 4.9.
The galvanometer consists of a coil, with many turns, free to rotate
about a fixed axis (Fig. 4.20), in a uniform radial magnetic field. There is
a cylindrical soft iron core which not only makes the field radial but also
increases the strength of the magnetic field.  When a current flows through
the coil, a torque acts on it. This torque is giv en by Eq. (4.20) to be
τ = NI AB
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 24 ---
Physics
130where the symbols have their usual meaning. Since
the field is radial by design, we have taken sin θ = 1 in
the above expression for the torque. The magnetic
torque NIAB tends to rotate the coil. A spring Sp
provides a counter torque kφ that balances the
magnetic torque NIAB; resulting in a steady angular
deflection φ. In equilibrium
kφ = NI AB
where k is the torsional constant of the spring; i.e. the
restoring torque per unit twist. The deflection φ is
indicated on the scale by a pointer attached to the
spring. We have
φ=

NAB
kI (4.26)
The quantity in brackets is a constant for a given
galvanometer.
The galvanometer can be used in a number of ways.
It can be used as a detector to check if a current is
flowing in the circuit. We have come across this usage
in the Wheatstone’s bridge arrangement. In this usage
the neutral position of the pointer (when no current is
flowing through the galvanometer) is in the middle of
the scale and not at the left end as shown in Fig.4.20.
Depending on the direction of the current, the pointer’s
deflection is either to the right or the left.
The galvanometer cannot as such be used as an
ammeter to measure the value of the current in a given circuit. This is for
two reasons: (i) Galvanometer is a very sensitive device, it gives a full-
scale deflection for a current of the order of µA. (ii) For measuring currents,
the galvanometer has to be connected in series, and as it has a large
resistance, this will change the value of the current in the circuit. To
overcome these difficulties, one attaches a small resistance rs, called shunt
resistance , in parallel with the galvanometer coil; so that most of the
current passes through the shunt. The resistance of this arrangement is,
RG rs / (RG  + rs)   ≃  rs         if    RG >>  rs
If rs has small value, in relation to the resistance of the rest of the
circuit Rc, the effect of introducing the measuring instrument is also small
and negligible. This arrangement is schematically shown in Fig. 4.21.
The scale of this ammeter is calibrated and then graduated to read off
the current value with ease. We define the current sensitivity of the
galvanometer as the deflection per unit current . From Eq. (4.26) this
current sensitivity is,
NAB
I kφ= (4.27)
A convenient way for the manufacturer  to increase the sensitivity is
to increase the number of turns N. We choose galvanometers having
sensitivities of value, required by our experiment.FIGURE  4.20  The moving coil
galvanometer. Its elements are
described in the text. Depending on
the requirement, this device can be
used as a current detector or for
measuring the value of the current
(ammeter) or voltage (voltmeter).
FIGURE  4.21
Conversion of a
galvanometer (G) to
an ammeter by the
introduction of a
shunt resistance rs of
very small value in
parallel.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 25 ---
131Moving Charges and
Magnetism
The galvanometer can also be used as a voltmeter to measure the
voltage across a given section of the circuit. For this it must be connected
in parallel  with that section of the circuit. Further, it must draw a very
small current, otherwise the voltage measurement will disturb the original
set up by an amount which is very large. Usually we like to keep the
disturbance due to the measuring device below one per cent.  To ensure
this, a large resistance R is connected in series  with the galvanometer.
This arrangement is schematically depicted in Fig.4.22. Note that the
resistance of the voltmeter is now,
RG + R ≃ R :  large
The scale of the voltmeter is calibrated to read off the voltage value
with ease. We define the voltage sensitivity as the deflection per unit
voltage . From Eq. (4.26),
φ
VNAB
kI
VNAB
k R=

 =

1(4.28)
An interesting point to note is that increasing the current sensitivity
may not necessarily increase the voltage sensitivity. Let us take Eq. (4.27)
which provides a measure of current sensitivity. If N → 2N, i.e., we double
the number of turns, then
2I Iφ φ→
Thus, the current sensitivity doubles. However, the resistance of the
galvanometer is also likely to double, since it is proportional to the length
of the wire. In Eq. (4.28), N →2N, and R →2R, thus the voltage sensitivity,
V Vφ φ→
remains unchanged. So in general, the modification needed for conversion
of a galvanometer to an ammeter  will be different from what is needed for
converting it into a voltmeter.
Example 4.12  In the circuit (Fig. 4.23) the current is to be
measured. What is the value of the current if the ammeter shown
(a) is a galvanometer with a resistance RG = 60.00 Ω; (b) is a
galvanometer described in (a) but converted to an ammeter by a
shunt resistance rs = 0.02 Ω; (c) is an ideal ammeter with zero
resistance?
FIGURE  4.23FIGURE  4.22
Conversion of a
galvanometer (G) to a
voltmeter by the
introduction of a
resistance R of large
value in series.
EXAMPLE  4.12
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 26 ---
Physics
132SUMMARY
1.The total force on a charge q moving with velocity v in the presence of
magnetic and electric fields B and E, respectively is called the Lorentz
force . It is given by the expression:
F = q (v × B  + E)
The magnetic force q  (v × B) is normal to v  and work done by it is zero.
2.A straight conductor of length l and carrying a steady current I
experiences a force F in a uniform external magnetic field B,
F = I l × B
where| l| = l and the direction of l is given by the direction of the
current.
3.In a uniform magnetic field B, a charge q executes a circular orbit in
a plane normal to B. Its frequency of uniform circular motion is called
the cyclotron frequency  and is given by:
2cq B
mν=π
This frequency is independent of the particle’s speed and radius. This
fact is exploited in a machine, the cyclotron, which is used to
accelerate charged particles.
4.The Biot-Savart  law asserts that the magnetic field d B due to an
element d l carrying a steady current I at a point P at a distance r from
the current element is:
0
3dd4Irµ×=πl rB
To obtain the total field at P, we must integrate this vector expression
over the entire length of the conductor.
5.The magnitude of the magnetic field due to a circular coil of radius R
carrying a current I at an axial distance x from the centre isEXAMPLE  4.12Solution
(a)Total resistance in the circuit is,
3 63GR+ = Ω . Hence, I = 3/63 = 0.048 A.
(b)Resistance of the galvanometer converted to an ammeter is,
R r
R rG s
G s+=×
+60 0 02
60 0 02Ω
Ω
Ω.
( . ) ≃ 0.02 Ω
Total resistance in the circuit is,
0.02 3 3.02Ω + Ω = Ω . Hence, I = 3/3.02 = 0.99 A.
(c)For the ideal ammeter with zero resistance,
 I =  3/3 = 1.00 A
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 27 ---
133Moving Charges and
Magnetism
2
0
2 2 3/22( )IRBx Rµ=+
At the centre this reduces to
0
2IBRµ=
6.Ampere’s Circuital Law:   Let an open surface S be bounded by a loop
C. Then the Ampere’s law states that B l.d I= ∫µ0
C/integralloop where I refers to
the current passing through S. The sign of I is determined from the
right-hand rule. We have discussed a simplified form of this law. If B
is directed along the tangent to every point on the perimeter L of a
closed curve and is constant in magnitude along perimeter then,
BL = µ0 Ie
where Ie is the net current enclosed by the closed circuit.
7.The magnitude of the magnetic field at a distance R from a long,
straight wire carrying a current I is given by:
π0
2IBRµ=
The field lines are circles concentric with the wire.
8.The magnitude of the field B inside a long solenoid  carrying a current
I is
B = µ0nI
where n is the number of turns per unit length.
9.Parallel currents attract and anti-parallel currents repel.
10.A planar loop carrying a current I, having N closely wound turns, and
an area A possesses a magnetic moment m where,
m = N I A
and the direction of m is given by the right-hand thumb rule : curl
the palm of your right hand along the loop with the fingers pointing
in the direction of the current. The thumb sticking out gives the
direction of m (and A)
When this loop is placed in a uniform magnetic field B, the force F on
it is:  F = 0
And the torque on it is,
τ = m × B
In a moving coil galvanometer, this torque is balanced by a counter-
torque due to a spring, yielding
kφ = NI AB
where φ  is the equilibrium deflection and k the torsion constant of
the spring.
11.A moving coil galvanometer can be converted into a ammeter by
introducing a shunt resistance rs, of small value in parallel. It can be
converted into a voltmeter by introducing a resistance of a large value
in series.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 28 ---
Physics
134Physical Quantity Symbol Nature Dimensions Units Remarks
Permeability of free µ0Scalar [MLT–2A–2] T m A–14π × 10–7 T m A–1
space
Magnetic Field B Vector [M T–2A–1] T (telsa)
Magnetic Moment m Vector [L2A] A m2 or J/T
Torsion Constant k   Scalar [M L2T–2]    N m rad–1Appears in MCG
POINTS TO PONDER
1.Electrostatic field lines originate at a positive charge and terminate at a
negative charge or fade at infinity. Magnetic field lines always form
closed loops.
2.The discussion in this Chapter holds only for steady currents which do
not vary with time.
When currents vary with time Newton’s third law is valid only if momentum
carried by the electromagnetic field is taken into account.
3.Recall the expression for the Lorentz force,
F = q (v × B + E)
This velocity dependent force has occupied the attention of some of the
greatest scientific thinkers. If one switches to a frame with instantaneous
velocity v, the magnetic part of the force vanishes. The motion of the
charged particle is then explained by arguing that there exists an
appropriate electric field in the new frame. We shall not discuss the
details of this mechanism. However, we stress that the resolution of this
paradox implies that electricity and magnetism are linked phenomena
(electromagnetism ) and that the Lorentz force expression does not  imply
a universal preferred frame of reference in nature.
4.Ampere’s Circuital law is not independent of the Biot-Savart law. It
can be derived from the Biot-Savart law. Its relationship to the
Biot-Savart law is similar to the relationship between Gauss’ s law and
Coulomb’s law.
EXERCISES
4.1 A circular coil of wire consisting of 100 turns, each of radius 8.0 cm
carries a current of 0.40 A. What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field B at the centre of the coil?
4.2 A long straight wire carries a current of 35 A. What is the magnitude
of the field B at a point 20 cm from the wire?
4.3 A long straight wire in the horizontal plane carries a current of 50 A
in north to south direction. Give the magnitude and direction of B
at a point 2.5 m east of the wire.
Reprint 2025-26


--- Page 29 ---
135Moving Charges and
Magnetism
4.4 A horizontal overhead power line carries a current of 90 A in east to
west direction. What is the magnitude and direction of the magnetic
field due to the current 1.5 m below the line?
4.5 What is the magnitude of magnetic force per unit length on a wire
carrying a current of 8 A and making an angle of 30º with the direction
of a uniform magnetic field of  0.15  T?
4.6 A 3.0 cm wire carrying a current of 10 A is placed inside a solenoid
perpendicular to its axis. The magnetic field inside the solenoid is
given to be 0.27 T. What is the magnetic force on the wire?
4.7 Two long and parallel straight wires A and B carrying currents of
8.0 A and 5.0 A in the same direction are separated by a distance of
4.0 cm. Estimate the force on a 10 cm section of wire A.
4.8 A closely wound solenoid 80 cm long has 5 layers of windings of 400
turns each. The diameter of the solenoid is 1.8 cm. If the current
carried is 8.0 A, estimate the magnitude of B inside the solenoid
near its centre.
4.9 A square coil of side 10 cm consists of 20 turns and carries a current
of 12 A. The coil is suspended vertically and the normal to the plane
of the coil makes an angle of 30 º with the direction of a uniform
horizontal magnetic field of magnitude 0.80 T. What is the magnitude
of torque experienced by the coil?
4.10 Two moving coil meters, M1 and M2 have the following particulars:
R1 = 10 Ω,  N1 = 30,
A1 = 3.6 × 10–3 m2, B1 = 0.25 T
R2 = 14  Ω,  N2 = 42,
A2 = 1.8 × 10–3 m2, B2 = 0.50 T
(The spring constants are identical for the two meters).
Determine the ratio of (a) current sensitivity and (b) voltage
sensitivity of M2 and M1.
4.11 In a chamber, a uniform magnetic field of 6.5 G (1 G = 1 0–4 T) is
maintained. An electron is shot into the field with a speed of
4.8 × 106 m s–1 normal to the field. Explain why the  path of the
electron is a circle. Determine the radius of the circular orbit.
(e = 1.5 × 10–19 C, me = 9.1×10–31 kg)
4.12 In Exercise 4.11 obtain the frequency of revolution of the electron in
its circular orbit. Does the answer depend on the speed of the
electron? Explain.
4.13 (a)A circular coil of 30 turns and radius 8.0 cm carrying a current
of 6.0 A is suspended vertically in a uniform horizontal magnetic
field of magnitude 1.0 T. The field lines make an angle of 60°
with the normal of the coil. Calculate the magnitude of the
counter torque that must be applied to prevent the coil from
turning.
(b)Would your answer change, if the circular coil in (a) were replaced
by a planar coil of some irregular shape that encloses the same
area? (All other particulars are also unaltered.)
Reprint 2025-26